Karnataka State Open University 
Mukthagangotri, Mysore-570006 

B.C.A Computer science 

Second Semester 

   COMPUTER NETWORKS                                                           

    COURSE – BCADSC-2.5                                                         BLOCK –1-4 

 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Preface 

With  clear,  straightforward  text  and  engaging  examples,  this  book  brings  an  active  style  of 

learning  to  the  study  of  computer  networking.  It  can  be  used  as  a  primary  textbook  to 

accompany lecture material or as a companion text to provide hands-on assignments. It is also 

an  ideal  guide  to  self-study  for  the  computing  professional.  In  fact,  this  book  can  help  any 

interested readers look under the hood of the network they use every day and become a more 

informed network consumer. 

The  book  consists  of  a  set  of  exercises,  each  of  which  involves  analyzing  traces  of  actual 

network activity. Important concepts are presented in the context of actual traces of real-world 

scenarios.  Readers  learn  the  details  of  networking  protocols  in  the  best  ways  possible—by 

seeing them in action! 

thing about the Internet is constant change. Despite these changes, the question we asked in the 

first edition is just as valid today: What are the underlying concepts and technologies that make 

the Internet work? The answer is that much of the TCP/IP architecture continues to function 

just as was envisioned by its creators more than 30 years ago. This isn’t to say that the Internet 

architecture  is  uninteresting;  quite  the  contrary.  Understanding  the  design  principles  that 

underly an architecture that has not only survived but fostered the kind of growth and change 

that the Internet has seen over the past 3 decades is precisely the right place to start.  

 
 
 
CREDIT PAGE  
Programme Name: BCA-Computer Science   Year/Semester:  II Semester Block No:1-4    

Course Name: Computer Networks                     Credit: 4                     Unit No: 1-16 
Course Design Expert Committee  

Dr. Sharanappa V Halase                                                                            Chairman 
Vice Chancellor, 
Karnataka State Open University, 
Mukthagangotri, Mysuru-570006. 

Dr. Ashok Kamble                                                                                          Member 
Dean (Academic), 
Karnataka State Open University, 
Mukthagangotri, Mysuru-570 006. 

Editorial Committee 

Dr. Mahesha D.M., MCA.,PhD   
BOS Chairman, 
Assistant Professor & Programme co-ordinator(PG) 
DoS&R in Computer Science, 
Karnataka State Open University, Mysuru-570 006. 

                                                   Chairman 

Smt, Suneetha MSc.,(PhD)    
Dept Chairperson & Programme co-ordinator (UG) 
DoS&R in Computer Science, 
Karnataka State Open University, Mysuru-570 006. 

                                                   Member Convener   

Dr Bhavya D.N., MTech., PhD                                                                     Member 
Assistant Professor & Programme co-ordinator(UG) 
DoS&R in Computer Science, 
Karnataka State Open University, Mysuru-570 006. 

Dr. Ashoka S B., MSc.PhD   
External Subject Expert, 
Assistant Professor,  
DoS&R in Computer Science, 
Maharani’s Cluster University, palace Road Bangalore-01 

   Member 

Name of Course Writer 

No of 
Blocks 

No of 
Units 

Name of  
Course Editor 

Dr Ashoka S.B 
Assistant professor 
DOS in Computer Science 
Maharni Cluster University 
Palce Road Bangalore-560001 

Block-1 

1-4 

Dr. Sharthkumar Y.H 
Professor IS 
MIT Belawadi 
Srirangapatna tq 
Mandya District -571477 

No of 
Units 

1- 4 

 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Poornima Y 
Asst, Professor 
Dos in Computer Science 
Maharaja’s College- 5700021 

Block-2 

5-8 

Sri. Pradeepa H. G 
Asst. Professor 
DOS in Computer Science 
JSS women’s College 
Saraswathipuram, Mysore 

5-8 

Dr.Basappa B Kodada 
Associate professor 
Department of Computer 
ScienceAJ Institute of 
Engineering and Technology 
Mangalore 

Smt. Sumanashree.Y.S 
Chairperson 
DOS in Computer Science 
(PG)JSS college of Arts, 
Science, Commerce OOty 
Road Mysore 

Block-3 

9-12 

Block-4 

13-16 

Sri. Somashekar BM  
BE., MTech., (PhD) 
Assistant Professor, 
Department of Information 
Science MIT Naguvanhalli  
Srirangapatna Taluk 571438 

Smt. Vasanthi 
Assistant professor 
DOS in Computer Science 
MIT Degree College 
Vishweshwaranagar Mysore 

9-12 

13-16 

                                                         Copy Right 
Registrar, 
Karnataka State Open University, 
Mukthagantoghri, Mysore 570 006. 
Developed by the Department of Studies and Research in Information Technology, 
under the guidance of Dean (Academic), KSOU, Mysuru. 
Karnataka State Open University, February-2022. 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or any other 
means, without permission in writing from the Karnataka State Open University. 
Further information on the Karnataka State Open University Programmes may be obtained 
from the University’s Office at Mukthagangotri, Mysore – 570 006. 

Printed and Published on behalf of Karnataka State Open University, Mysore-570 006 by 
the Registrar (Administration)-2023 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Data Communication, Component and Basic Concepts  Introduction, 
Characteristics delivery, Accuracy, Timeliness and Jitter, Components  
Message,  Sender,  Receiver,  Transmission  medium  and  protocol. 
Topology – Mesh, Star, Tree, Bus, Ring and Hybrid Topologies. 
Transmission modes – Simplex, Half Duplex, Full Duplex Categories 
of networks –LAN, MAN, WAN. DNS, IP address, MAC address, 
Web  browser,  ISP,  URL,  WWW,Broadband  Transmissions.  Guided 
Media – TwistedPair Cable, Coaxial Cable, Fiber-Optic Cable. 

Unguided  Media  –  Radio  Wave  Transmission  Systems,  Microwave 
Transmission  Systems,  Infrared  Transmission  Systems  and  Satellite 
Communication System. 
The  OSI  Model  –  Functions  of  all  the  Seven  Layers.  Networking 
Devices  –  Functions  and  Applications  of  Hub,  Switches,  Bridges, 
Repeaters 
Internetworking Devices – Functions and Applications of Routers and 
Gateways.IP  Addressing  –  Dynamic  IP  Addressing,  Static  IP 
Addressing, 
Types  of  IP  Addresses.  Protocols  –  Overview  only-  TCP,  UDP,  IP, 
IPV4, IPV6, 

PAGE 

NO. 

1-8 

9-25 

26-52 

53-72 

73-78 

79-89 

90-97 

98-114 

BLOCK 1 

    UNIT- 1 

UNIT-2 

UNIT-3 

UNIT-4 

BLOCK 1I 

UNIT-5 

UNIT-6 

UNIT-7 

UNIT-8 

BLOCK 1II 

    UNIT- 9 

TCP/IP Suite, SMTP, POP3, SNMP, HTTP, FTP, DNS, ICMP 

115-132 

UNIT-10 

IGMP, ARP, RARP, OSPF, BGP, ALOHA 

UNIT-11 

UNIT-12 

Packet Switching Networks – Network Services and Internal Network 
Operations, 
Packet  Network  Topology,  Datagrams  and  Virtual  Circuits, 
Connectionless Packet Switching, 

BLOCK 1V 

UNIT-13 

UNIT-14 

UNIT-15 

UNIT-16 

Virtual Circuit Packet Switching. Routing Concepts – Routing Tables 

Dijkstar’s  Shortest  Path  Routing  Algorithm,  Congestion  Control 
Algorithms-Leaky Bucket Algorithm. 
Data  Link  Issues  –Single  bit  error  and  Burst  Error,  concepts  of 
Redundancy, Checksum 
Single Bit Error correction and Hamming Code correction method. 

133-142 

143-151 

152-166 

167-176 

177-186 

187-197 

198-209 

        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 1: COMPUTER NETWORKS 

Structure: 

1.0   Objectives 

1.1  

Introduction 

1.2   Data communication Components and basic concepts 

1.4   Characteristic delivery, Accuracy, Timelineness and jitter 

1.7   Summary 

1.8   Keywords 

1.9  Questions for self-study 

1.10   References 

1.0   OBJECTIVES 

At the end of this unit you will be able to: 

  Discuss data communication 

  Explain the component and basic concepts 

  State the advantages accuracy 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 

The  Network  is  a  group  of  computers  connected  together  to  share  resources  such  as 

programs,  files,  printer,  and  storage  disk.  However  modern  network  also  includes 

connections  to  portable/mobile  devices  (such  as  tablet  PC,  notebook,  PDA,  digital 

camera, portable MP3 player, and mobile phone), home entertainment devices (such as 

TV, video player/recorder, stereo, and radio), home appliances (such as refrigerator and 

washing  machine),  and  monitoring  or  sensor  devices.  Wearable  things  (such  as 

wristwatch,  clothing)  and  perhaps  living  objects  like  human,  pet,  and  tree  will  be 

network-able in the not-so-distant future.  

Network  design  is  not  a  hard-to-grasp  science,  yet  it  had  been  only  the  job  of  IT 

professionals  or  network  specialists  before  because  it  was  only  about  big  company 

networks with complex wiring and many computers. Nowadays network design comes 

down to consumer realm because of the growing popularity of wireless ad-hoc networks 

using  IrDA  and  Bluetooth  and  the  prevailing  home  networking  technologies  such  as 

Ethernet,  Wi-Fi,  HomePNA,  and  HomePlug.  New  technologies  such  as  ZigBee  and 

WiMedia (UWB) will give even more connectivity choices for consumer networks. 

  Advantages of computer networks 

           These purposes must be fulfilled by various advantages of networks. 

o  Resource Sharing 

Resource sharing means the goal is to make all programs, data and equipment available 

to anyone on the network without regard to the physical location of the resource and the 

user. 

Example: Suppose a user happens to be 1000 km away from his data should not prevent 

him from using the data as though they were local. Also load sharing is another aspect 

of resource sharing. 

o  High Reliability 

Network provides high reliability by having alternative sources of supply. 

Example: Suppose all files could be replicated on two or three machines, so if one of 

them  is  unavailable  (due  to  a  hardware  failure),  the  other  copies  could  be  used.  For 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
military,  banking,  air  traffic  control,  and  other  applications,  the  ability  to  continue 

operating the face of hardware problems is of great importance. 

o  Low Cost/Saving Money 

Small computers have a much better price/performance ratio than large one. Mainframes 

are roughly a factor of fourty faster than the fastest single chip microprocessors, but they 

cost a thousand times more. This imbalance has caused many system designers to build 

systems consisting of powerful personal computers, as per user, with data kept on one 

or more shared file server machines. 

o  Communications 

Another goal of setting up a computer network has little to do with technology at all. A 

computer  network  can  provide  a  powerful  communication  medium  among  widely 

separated people. Using a network, it is easy for two or more people who live far apart 

to write a report together. i.e. when one author makes a change to the document, which 

is kept online, the others can see the change immediately, instead of waiting several days 

for a letter. 

  Uses of Computer Networks 

1.  Access to remote programs: A company that has produced a model simulating the 

world economy may allow its clients to log in over the network and run the program 

to see how various projected inflation rates, interest rates, and currency fluctuations 

might affect their business. This approach is often preferable to selling the program 

outright, especially if the model is constantly being adjusted or requires an extremely 

large mainframe computer to run. 

2.  Access to remote data bases: It may soon be easy for the average person sitting at 

home to make reservations for aero planes, trains, buses, boats, hotels, restaurants, 

theatres and so on, anywhere in the world with instant confirmation. Home banking 

and the automated newspaper also fall in this category. 

3.   Value-added communication facilities: High-quality communication facilities tend 

to reduce the need for physical proximity. Everyone in the world, have an ability to 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
send and receive electronic mail. These mails  are also be able to contain digitized 

voice, still pictures and possibly even moving television and video images. 

4.   using for entertainment purpose.  

5.   Accessing the information systems like World Wide Web, this contains almost any 

information. 

1.2 DATA COMMUNICATION 

Data communications refers to the transmission of this digital data between two or more 

computers and a computer network or data network is a telecommunications network 

that allows computers to exchange data. The physical connection between networked 

computing devices is established using either cable media or wireless media. The best-

known  computer  network  is  the  Internet.  This  unit  should  teach  you  basics  of  Data 

Communication and Computer Network (DCN) and will also take you through various 

advance concepts related to Data Communication and Computer Network. 

A system of interconnected computers and computerized peripherals such as printers is 

called computer network. This interconnection among computers facilitates information 

sharing among them. Computers may connect to each other by either wired or wireless 

media. 

  Network Engineering 

Networking engineering is a complicated task, which involves software, firmware, chip 

level engineering, hardware, and electric pulses. To ease network engineering, the whole 

networking  concept  is  divided  into  multiple  layers.  Each  layer  is  involved  in  some 

particular  task  and  is  independent  of  all  other  layers.  But  as  a  whole,  almost  all 

networking tasks depend on all of these layers. Layers share data between them and they 

depend on each other only to take input and send output. 

  Internet 

A network of networks is called an internetwork, or simply the internet. It is the largest 

network in existence on this planet. The internet hugely connects all WANs and it can 

have connection to LANs and Home networks. Internet uses TCP/IP protocol suite and 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
uses  IP as  its  addressing protocol.  Present  day,  Internet  is  widely implemented using 

IPv4. Because of shortage of address spaces, it is gradually migrating from IPv4 to IPv6. 

Internet  enables  its  users  to  share  and  access  enormous  amount  of  information 

worldwide. It uses WWW, FTP, email services, audio and video streaming etc. At huge 

level, internet works on Client-Server model. Internet uses very high speed backbone of 

fiber optics. To inter-connect various continents, fibers are laid under sea known to us 

as submarine communication cable. 

  Applications of Communication & Computer Network 

Computer  systems  and  peripherals  are  connected  to  form  a  network.  They  provide 

numerous advantages: 

o  Resource sharing such as printers and storage devices 

o  Exchange of information by means of e-Mails and FTP 

o  Information sharing by using Web or Internet 

o  Interaction with other users using dynamic web pages 

o  IP phones 

o  Video conferences 

o  Parallel computing 

o  Instant messaging 

  A data communications system has five components  

o  Message:  The  message  is  the  information/data  to  be  communicated.  Popular 

forms of information include text, numbers, pictures, audio, and video. 

o  Transmitter:  The  transmitter  is  the  device  that  sends  the  data.  It  can  be  a 

computer, workstation, telephone handset, video camera, and so on. 

5 

 
 
 
Figure 1.3: Five components of data communication 

o  Receiver: The receiver is the device that receives the data. It can be a computer, 

workstation, telephone handset, television, and so on. 

o  Transmission medium: The transmission medium is the physical path by which 

a message travels from sender to receiver. Some examples of transmission media 

include twisted-pair wire, coaxial cable, fiber-optic cable, and radio waves.  

o  Protocol:  A  protocol  is  a  set  of  rules  that  govern  data  communications.  It 

represents an agreement between the communicating devices. Without a protocol, 

two devices may be connected but not communicating.  

  Data Representation: 

Nowadays information comes in different forms such as text, numbers, images, 

audio, and video. 

o  Text: Text is represented as a bit pattern, a sequence of bits 0s or 1s. A set of bit 

patterns that is designed to represent text symbols is called a code; the process of 

representing symbols is called coding. The prevalent coding system called 

Unicode uses 32 bits to represent a symbol or character. The American Standard 

Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) now constitutes the first 127 

characters in Unicode and is also referred to as Basic Latin. 

o  Numbers: Numbers are also represented by bit patterns. However, a code such 

as ASCII is not used to represent numbers; the number is directly converted to a 

binary number to simplify mathematical operations. 

o  Images: Images are also represented by bit patterns. In its simplest form, an 

image is composed of a matrix of pixels (picture elements), where each pixel is a 

6 

 
 
 
small dot. For a black and white image, a 1-bit pattern is enough to represent a 

pixel. In the RGB method to represent color image each color is made of a 

combination of three primary colors: red, green, and blue. Another method is 

called YCM, in which a color is made of a combination of three other primary 

colors: yellow, cyan, and magenta. 

o  Audio: Audio refers to the recording or broadcasting of sound or music. Audio is 

by nature different from text, numbers, or images. It is continuous, not discrete. 

Even when we use a microphone to change voice or music to an electric signal, 

we create a continuous signal.  

o  Video: Video refers to the recording or broadcasting of a picture or movie. 

Video can either be produced as a continuous entity (e.g., by a TV camera), or it 

can be a combination of images, each a discrete entity, arranged to convey the 

idea of motion. We can change video to a digital or an analog signal.  

1.3 CHRECTERSTIC DELIVARY, ACCURACY, TIMELINENESS, JITTER 

The word data refers to information presented in whatever form is agreed upon by the 

parties  creating and  using the data. Data  communications are the exchange of data 

between two devices via some form of transmission medium such as a wire cable. For 

data  communications  to  occur,  the  communicating  devices  must  be  part  of  a 

communication system made up of a combination of hardware (physical equipment) 

and software (programs). The effectiveness of a data communications system depends 

on four fundamental characteristics: delivery, accuracy, timeliness, and jitter.  

I. Delivery-  The system must deliver data to  the correct  destination. Data must be 

received by the intended device or user and only by that device or user.  

2. Accuracy- The system must deliver the data accurately. Data that have been altered 

in transmission and left uncorrected are unusable.  

3. Timeliness- The system must deliver data in a timely manner. Data delivered late 

are useless. In the case of video and audio, timely delivery means delivering data as 

they are produced, in the same order that they are produced, and without significant 

delay. This kind of delivery is called real-time transmission. 

7 

 
 
 
 
4. Jitter- Jitter refers to the variation in the packet arrival time. It is the uneven delay 

in the delivery of audio or video packets. For example, let us assume that video packets 

are sent every 3D ms. If some of the packets arrive with 3D-ms delay and others with 

4D-ms delay, an uneven quality in the video is the result. 

1.4 SUMMARY 

This  unit  introduces  internetworking  concept  and  its  application  in  the  modern  era 

internet  and  communication,  later  it  describes  the  data  communication  and  its 

component and their basic concepts, finally you can discuss the characteristic delivery 

and its accuracy and timeliness, jitter. 

1.5 KEYWORDS 

Simplex 

Half-Duplex 

Full-Duplex 

Transmitter 

1.6 QUESTION FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  What is Computer Networks? Explain in detail. 

2.  Discuss in detail about data communication network. 

3.  Explain Component and basic concepts of Networks. 

4.  Discuss characteristic delivery, accuracy, timelineness, jitter. 

1.8 REFERENCE 

1.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan, 4th   Edition, Tata 

McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

2.  Communication Networks: Fundamental Concepts and Key Architectures - Alberto 

Leon, Garcia and Indra Widjaja, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw- Hill, 2004.  

3.  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 2: TRANSMISSION MEDIUM 

Structure: 

2.0   Objectives 

2.1  

Introduction 

2.2   Message, Sender, Receiver, 

2.3   Transmission medium and protocol. 

2.4   Topology  

          2.4.1 Mesh 

          2.4.2 Star topology 

          2.4.3 Tree topology  

          2.4.4 Bus topology 

          2.4.5 Ring topology 

          2.4.6 Hybrid Topologies.  

2.7   Summary 

2.8   Keywords 

2.9  Questions for self-study 

2.10   References 

2.0   OBJECTIVES 

At the end of this unit you will be able to: 

  Understand Message, Sender, Receiver. 

  Discuss the Transmission medium and protocol. 

  Explain the Mesh, Star, Tree, Bus, Ring and Hybrid Topologies. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 

The  representation  of  data  can  be  done  through  computers  as  well  as  other  types  of 

telecommunication  devices  with  the  help  of  signals.  These  are  broadcasted  from  one 

device 

to  another 

in 

the  shape  of electromagnetic energy.  The  signals 

like 

electromagnetic  can  travel  throughout  vacuum,  air  otherwise  other  transmission 

mediums to travel from one sender to another receiver. Electromagnetic energy mainly 

includes voice, power, radio waves, visible light, UV light, & gamma rays. In the OSI 

model, the first layer is the physical layer which is dedicated to the transmission media. 

In data communication, a transmission media is a physical lane between the Tx & the 

Rx and it is the channel where data can be transmitted from one area to another. 

  What is Transmission Media 

A communication channel  that  is  used  to  carry  the  data  from  the  transmitter  to  the 

receiver through the electromagnetic signals. The main function of this is to carry the 

data in the bits form through the Local Area Network (LAN). In data communication, it 

works like a physical path between the sender & the receiver. For instance, in a copper 

cable network the bits in the form of electrical signals whereas in a fiber network, the 

bits are available in the form of light pulses. The quality, as well as characteristics of 

data transmission, can be determined from the characteristics of medium & signal. The 

properties of different transmission media are delay, bandwidth, maintenance, cost, and 

easy installation. 

2.2 MESSAGE, SENDER, RECEIVER 

Basic Components of a Communication System 

The following are the basic requirements for working of a communication system. 

1. The sender (source) who creates the message to be transmitted 

2. A medium that carries the message 

3. The receiver (sink) who receives the message 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         Data Communication system components 

1.  Message: A message in its most general meaning is an object of communication. It is 

a vessel which provides information. Yet, it can also be this information. Therefore, 

its meaning is dependent upon the context in which it is used; the term may apply to 

both the information and its form. 

2. Sender: The sender will have some kind of meaning she wishes to convey to the 

receiver. It might not be conscious knowledge; it might be a sub-conscious wish for 

communication. What  is desired to  be communicated would be some kind  of idea, 

perception, feeling, or datum. It will be a part of her reality that she wishes to send to 

somebody else. 

3. Receiver: These messages are delivered to another party. No doubt, you have in 

mind a desired action or reaction you hope your message prompts from the opposite 

party. Keep in mind, the other party also enters into the communication process with 

ideas and feelings that will undoubtedly influence their understanding of your message 

and  their  response.  To  be  a  successful  communicator,  you  should  consider  these 

before delivering your message, then acting appropriately. 

4. Medium: Medium is a means used to exchange / transmit the message. The sender 

must choose an appropriate medium  for transmitting the message else the message 

might not be conveyed to the desired recipients. The choice of appropriate medium of 

communication is essential for making the message effective and correctly interpreted 

by the recipient. This choice of communication medium varies depending upon the 

features of communication. For instance - Written medium is chosen when a message 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
has to be conveyed to a small group of people, while an oral medium is chosen when 

spontaneous feedback is required from the recipient as misunderstandings are cleared 

then and there. 

5.  Protocol: A protocol is  a  formal  description  of  digital  message  formats  and  the 

rules  for  exchanging  those  messages  in  or  between  computing  systems  and  in 

telecommunications.  Protocols  may  include  signalling,  authentication  and  error 

detection  and  correction  syntax,  semantics,  and  synchronization  of  communication 

and may be implemented in hardware or software, or both. 

6. Feedback: Feedback  is  the  main  component  of  communication  process  as  it 

permits  the  sender  to  analyze  the  efficacy  of  the  message.  It  helps  the  sender  in 

confirming the  correct  interpretation  of message by the decoder.  Feedback may be 

verbal  (through  words)  or  non-verbal  (in  form  of  smiles,  sighs,  etc.).  It  may  take 

written form also in form of memos, reports, etc. 

2.3 TRANSMISSION MEDIUM AND PROTOCOL. 

A transmission medium can be broadly defined as anything that can carry information 

from a source to a destination. For example, the transmission medium for two people 

having a dinner conversation is the air. The air can also be used to convey the message 

in a smoke signal or semaphore. For a written message, the transmission medium might 

be a mail carrier, a truck, or an airplane. In data communications the definition of the 

information and the transmission medium is more specific. The transmission medium is 

usually free space, metallic cable, or fiber-optic cable. The information is usually a signal 

that is the result of a conversion of data from another form. 

In telecommunications, transmission media can be divided into two broad categories: 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guided and unguided. Guided media include twisted-pair cable, coaxial cable, and 

fiber-optic cable. Unguided medium is free space. 

Guided media, which are those that provide a conduit from one device to another, 

include twisted-pair cable, coaxial cable, and fiber-optic cable. A signal travelling 

along any of these media is directed and contained by the physical limits of the 

medium. Twisted-pair and coaxial cable use metallic (copper) conductors that accept 

and transport signals in the form of electric current. Optical fiber is a cable that accepts 

and transports signals in the form of light. 

  Twisted-Pair Cable 

A twisted pair consists of two conductors (normally copper), each with its own plastic 

insulation, twisted together.  

One of the wires is used to carry signals to the receiver, and the other is used only as a 

ground reference. The receiver uses the difference between the two. In addition to the 

signal  sent  by  the  sender  on  one  of  the  wires,  interference  (noise)  and  crosstalk  may 

affect both wires and create unwanted signals. If the two wires are parallel, the effect of 

these  unwanted  signals  is  not  the  same  in  both  wires  because  they  are  at  different 

locations relative to the noise or crosstalk sources (e,g., one is closer and the other is 

farther). This results in a difference at the receiver. By twisting the pairs, a balance is 

maintained. For example, suppose in one twist, one wire is closer to the noise source and 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the other is farther; in the next twist, the reverse is true. Twisting makes it probable that 

both wires are equally affected by external influences (noise or crosstalk). This means 

that the receiver, which calculates the difference between the two, receives no unwanted 

signals. The unwanted signals are mostly cancelled out. From the above discussion, it is 

clear  that  the  number  of  twists  per  unit  of  length  (e.g.,  inch)  has  some  effect  on  the 

quality of the cable. 

  Unshielded Versus Shielded Twisted-Pair Cable 

The  most  common  twisted-pair  cable  used  in  communications  is  referred  to  as 

unshielded twisted-pair (UTP). IBM has also produced a version of twisted-pair cable 

for  its  use  called  shielded  twisted-pair  (STP).  STP  cable  has  a  metal  foil  or  casing 

improves the quality of cable by preventing the penetration of noise or crosstalk, it is 

bulkier and more expensive.  

  Coaxial Cable 

Coaxial cable (or coax) carries signals of higher frequency ranges than those in twisted 

pair cable, in part because the two  media are constructed quite differently. Instead of 

having two wires, coax has a central core conductor of solid or stranded wire (usually 

copper) enclosed in an insulating sheath, which is, in turn, encased in an outer conductor 

of metal foil, braid, or a combination of the two. The outer metallic wrapping serves both 

as a shield against noise and as the second conductor, which completes the circuit. This 

outer conductor is also enclosed in an insulating sheath, and the whole cable is protected 

by a plastic cover. 

14 

 
 
 
 
  Coaxial Cable Standards 

Coaxial cables are categorized by their radio government (RG) ratings. Each RG 

number denotes a unique set of physical specifications, including the wire gauge of the 

inner conductor, the thickness and type of the inner insulator, the construction of the 

shield, and the size and type of the outer casing. Each cable defined by an RG rating is 

adapted for a specialized function, as shown in Table  

  Fiber-Optic Cable 

A fiber-optic cable is made of glass or plastic and transmits signals in the form of light. 

To understand optical fiber, we first need to explore several aspects of the nature of light. 

Light travels in a straight line as long as it is moving through a single uniform substance. 

If a ray of light traveling through one substance suddenly enters another substance (of a 

different density), the ray changes direction.  

Optical fibres use reflection to guide light through a channel. A glass or plastic core is 

surrounded by a cladding of less dense glass or plastic. The difference in density of the 

two materials must be such that a beam of light moving through the core is reflected off 

the cladding instead of being refracted into it.  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Protocols: 

A protocol is a set of rules that govern data communications. A protocol defines what is 

communicated, how it is communicated, and when it is communicated. The key elements 

of a protocol are syntax, semantics, and timing of Syntax. The term syntax refers to the 

structure or format of the data, meaning the order in which they are presented.  

The  word  semantics  refers  to  the  meaning  of  each  section  of  bits.  How  a  particular 

pattern is to be interpreted, and what action is to be taken based on that interpretation? 

For example, does an address identify the route to be taken or the final destination of the 

message? 

The term timing refers to two characteristics: when data should be sent and how fast they 

can be sent. For example, if a sender produces data at 100 Mbps but the receiver can 

process data at only 1 Mbps, the transmission will overload the receiver and some data 

will be lost. 

2.4 TOPOLOGY MESH, STAR, TREE, BUS, RING, HYBRID TOPOLOGIES 

The term “TOPOLOGY” refers to the way in which the end points or stations/computer 

systems, attached to the networks, are interconnected. We have seen that a topology is 

essentially a stable geometric arrangement of computers in a network. If you want to 

select a topology for doing networking. You have attention to the following points. 

o  Application S/W and protocols. 

o  Types of data communicating devices. 

o  Geographic scope of the network. 

o  Cost. 

o  Reliability. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
            Depending on the requirement there are different Topologies to construct a network. 

o  Mesh topology. 

o  Star topology. 

o  Tree topology. 

o  Bus topology. 

o  Ring topology. 

  Ring and mesh topologies are felt convenient for peer to peer transmission. 

  Star and tree are more convenient for client server. 

  Bus topology is equally convenient for either of them. 

          2.4.1 Mesh Topology. 

In  a  mesh  topology,  every  device  has  a  dedicated  point-to-point  link  to  every  other 

device.  The  term  dedicated  means  that  the  link  carries  traffic  only  between  the  two 

devices it connects.  In a fully connected mesh network with  n nodes, the number of 

physical links is n(n-1). However, if each physical link allows communication in both 

directions (duplex mode), we need n (n -1) /2 duplex-mode links. To accommodate that 

many  links,  every  device  on  the  network  must  have  n  –  1  input/output  port  to  be 

connected to the other n - 1 stations. One practical example of a mesh topology is the 

connection  of  telephone  regional  offices  in  which  each  regional  office  needs  to  be 

connected to every other regional office.  

                                                     2.4.1 Mesh Topology 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  Advantages of mesh topology: 

A mesh offers several advantages over other network topologies. they are 

o  The network has multiple links, so if one route is blocked then other routes can be 

used for data communication. Thus the topology is robust. 

o  The problem of traffic does not arise, as there are dedicated links that guarantees 

that each connection can carry its own data. 

o  Point to point links makes fault identification easy. Traffic can be routed to avoid 

links with suspected problems. This enables to discover the precise location of the 

fault and aids in finding the cause and solution.  

o  The topology ensures the advantage of privacy or security. When every message 

travels  along  a  dedicated  line,  only  the  intended  recipient  sees  it.  Physical 

boundaries prevent other users from gaining access to messages. 

  Disadvantages of mesh topology: 

o  The topology is expensive in terms of the cabling cost. 

o  Installation is complex as each node is connected to every other node. 

o  There is mesh of wiring which can be difficult to manage. 

For  these  reasons  a  mesh  topology  is  usually  implemented  in  a  limited  fashion,  for 

example, as a backbone connecting the main computers of a hybrid network that can 

include several other topologies.  

            2.4.2 Star Topology: 

In  a  star  topology,  each  node  has  a  dedicated  point-to-point  link  only  to  a  central 

controller,  usually  called  a  hub.  The  hub  manages  and  controls  all  functions  of  the 

network. The nodes are not directly linked to one another. Unlike a mesh topology, a 

star  topology  does  not  allow  direct  traffic  between  nodes.  The  controller  acts  as  an 

exchange: If one node wants to send data to another, it sends the data to the controller, 

which then relays the data to the destination. 

18 

 
 
 
 
                    2.4.2 Star Topology 

The star topology reduces the chance of network failure by connecting all the nodes to a 

central  controller.  Failure  of  a  node  on  a  star  network  is  easy  to  detect  and  can  be 

removed  from  the  network.  However,  failure  of  the  central  controller  will  disable 

communication throughout the whole network. 

  Advantages of star topology: 

o  Communication in the network is centrally managed by the hub. 

o  The topology is easy to modify and add additional nodes. 

o  It is very robust. Failure of one node does not affect the rest of the network. 

o  It is easy to detect and isolate faults. Hub can be used to monitor link problems 

and bypass defective links. 

o  It is less expensive than a mesh topology. In a star, each device needs only one 

link and one I/O port to connect it to any number of others. 

o  It easy to install and reconfigure.  

o  Far less cabling needs to be housed, and additions, moves, and deletions involve 

only one connection between that device and the hub. 

  Disadvantages of star topology: 

o  The whole topology depends on the hub or central node. If the hub fails, then the 

entire network fails. 

o  Although a star requires far less cable than a mesh, each node must be linked to a 

central hub. The topology is relatively expensive in terms of the wiring cost than 

in some other topologies (such as ring or bus). 

19 

 
 
 
The star topology is used in local-area networks (LANs). High-speed LANs often use a 

star topology with a central hub. 

           2.4.3 Tree Topology 

 A tree network topology hierarchically links computers and requires data to circulate 

through the branches. In this network, various terminals and computers are connected 

to  the main computer in  a hierarchical  aspect,  with each additional device branching 

from one of the higher level. 

It uses simple software to control the network. Tree topology provides a concentration 

point for control and error resolution. It is the central computer which is at the topmost 

order of hierarchy. Mostly it is a mainframe computer. This topology is also known as 

a vertical network or a hierarchical network. The topology is shown in the figure. 

                                               2.4.3 Tree Topology 

The main computer, M, instructs the traffic flow between various components. 

It  uses  a  distributed  aspect,  and  thus  every  computer  is  managed  by  its  upper-level 

computer.  In  figure  C  and  D,  the  system  is  controlled  by  B,  similarly,  F  and  G  are 

controlled by E, and further A, B and E are controlled by M. Thus, indirectly, all the 

computers  are  controlled  by  the  main  computer  M.  Still,  no  doubt  the  controlling  of 

children system by its parent reduce the workload of main computers. The topology is 

thus simple from the point of control, but at the same time, it is sure that if the main 

computer fails, the entire network can fail. 

  Advantages 

The advantages of the tree network topology are as follows  

20 

 
 
 
 
 
o  Controlling and control software is very simple. 

o  A new node at the lowest levels can be inserted very efficiently. 

  Disadvantages 

The disadvantages of the tree network topology are as follows  

o 

o 

o 

o 

If the topmost computer fails, it can lead to the failure of the entire network. 

If an intermediate level computer fails, it can cause the loss of its lower level 

machines from the network. 

If an original node is to be added at higher levels, it is complicated. 

If the levels boost, it can lead to an intricate network. 

         2.4.4 BUS Topology 

The preceding examples all describe point-to-point connections. A bus topology, on the 

other hand, is multipoint. One long cable acts as a backbone to link all the devices in a 

network. On a bus network there is no central point for management and control.  These 

functions are distributed to each node on the bus. Data frames originating at a node are 

propagated away from the node in both the directions on the bus. Each node on the bus 

interrogates  the  data  frame  destination  address.  If  the  destination  does  not  match  the 

node  address,  the  node  discards  the  data  frame  back  on  to  the  bus.  If  the  destination 

address matches the node address, it accepts the data frame and processing is done.  

                        2.4.4 Bus Topology 

Bus topology was the one of the first topologies used in the design of early local area 

networks. Ethernet LANs can use a bus topology, but they are less popular.  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
  Advantages of a bus topology: 

o  The bus topology is cheap, easy to handle and implement. 

o  The topology is simple and reliable. 

o  It requires less cable than mesh or star topologies. 

o  It is easy to extend the network. 

  Disadvantages: 

o  It is difficult to reconnect and to isolates faults.  

o  The  cable  length  is  limited.  This  limits  the  number  of  stations  that  can  be 

connected. 

o  A break in the bus cable stops all transmission, even between the devices on the 

same side of the problem. The damaged area reflects signals back in the direction 

of origin, creating noise in both directions. 

o  Adding new devices may require modification or replacement of the backbone. 

Network performance deteriorates with additional nodes. 

o  Problem solving may be more complex. 

2.4.5 Ring Topology 

In a ring topology, each node has a dedicated point-to-point connection with only the 

two nodes on either side of it. A signal is passed along the ring in one direction, from 

node  to  node,  until  it  reaches  its  destination.  Each  node  in  the  ring  incorporates  a 

repeater.  When  a  node  receives  a  signal  intended  for  another  node,  its  repeater 

regenerates the bits and passes them along. Generally, in a ring, a signal is circulating at 

all times. If one node does not receive a signal within a specified period, it can issue an 

alarm. The alarm alerts the network operator to the problem and its location. 

                        Figure 2.4.5: A Ring topology connecting four stations 

22 

 
 
 
 
  Advantages: 

o  The topology is relatively easy to install and reconfigure.  

o  Every node has equal access to the token and the opportunity to transmit. 

o  In a ring, every device is linked to only its immediate neighbors. To add or delete 

a  device  requires  changing  only  two  connections.  Thus  the  performance  of  the 

network is not affected by the addition of nodes. 

  Disadvantages: 

o  In a simple ring, the failure of a single node of the network can cause the entire 

network to fail. This weakness can be solved by using a dual ring or a switch capable 

of closing off the break. 

o  It is difficult to isolate problems in the network. 

o  Unidirectional traffic is a disadvantage.  

Ring topology was prevalent when IBM introduced its local-area network Token Ring. 

Today, the need for higher-speed LANs has made this topology less popular.  

2.4.6 Hybrid topologies 

Hybrid topology is a network topology that is composed of one or more interconnections 

of two or more networks that are based upon different physical topologies. It is a mixture 

of  above  mentioned  topologies.  Usually,  a  central  computer  is  attached  with  sub-

controllers which in turn participate in a variety of topologies. 

Figure 2.4.6: Hybrid topology 

23 

 
 
 
 
  Advantages: 

o  The topology is extremely flexible. 

o  It is highly reliable. 

  Disadvantages: 

o  The topology is very expensive than other topologies. 

o  Hybrid network requires more cabling between its hardware devices. 

o  Hybrid network is difficult to set up and troubleshoot. 

2.4 SUMMARY 

The transfer of data from one device to another through a transmission medium.  The 

communication devices are connected by media links to form a network. The connection 

is either point-to-point or multipoint. Network topology refers to the physical or logical 

arrangement of a network. The basic topologies are mesh, star, bus, ring, tree and hybrid 

technologies.  

2.5 KEYWORDS 

Traffic 

Transmission medium 

Components 

Twisted-pair 

2.6 QUESTION FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  What is transmission medium? Explain 

2.  Explain transmission medium and its protocol. 

3.  Discuss in detail message, sender, receiver. 

4.  What is mesh topology? Explain 

5.  Explain Star topology in detail 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  Discuss in detail ring topology. 

7.  What is BUS topology? 

8.  Explain RING topology. 

9.  Discuss in detail hybrid topologies. 

2.7 REFERENCES 

1.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan, 4th   Edition, Tata 

McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

2.  Communication Networks: Fundamental Concepts and Key Architectures - Alberto 

Leon, Garcia and Indra Widjaja, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw- Hill, 2004.  

3.  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 3: TRANSMISSION MODES, NETWORK HARDWARE, IP ADDRESS  

Structure: 

3.0   Objectives 

3.1  

Introduction 

3.2   Simplex, Half Duplex, Full Duplex 

3.4   LAN, MAN, WAN.  

3.5     DNS, IP address, MAC address, 

3.6   Summary 

3.7   Keywords 

3.8  Questions for self-study 

3.9   References 

3.0   OBJECTIVES 

After studying this unit, you will be able to 

  Explain the transmission modes 

  Understand Simplex, Half Duplex, Full Duplex 

  Discuss the LAN, MAN, WAN. 

  State the Applications DNS, IP address, MAC address, 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 

Transmission  mode,  also  known  as  a communication  mode,  is  the  transfer  of  data 

between 

two  devices  via  a  communication  channel 

that 

includes  an optical 

fiber, wireless  channels, copper  wires,  and  other storage  media.  Data  is  transmitted 

between two devices in  the form of electromagnetic waves. There are numerous data 

transmission methods in which the message is delivered in the form of a sequence of 

pulses  utilizing  digital  modulation.  The  data  transmission  method  was  initially  used 

in modems in 

a 

computer 

networking 

system 

in 

the 1940s, 

then 

in LANs, WANs, repeaters,  and  other  networking  systems.  Based  on  the  direction  of 

exchange of information. 

The Physical Layer in the Open System Interconnection (OSI) Layer Model is dedicated 

to data transmission in the network. It primarily determines the direction in which the 

data must travel to reach the receiving system or node. Data is transmitted between the 

devices  via 

the communication  channel that 

includes  an optical 

fiber, copper 

wires, wireless channels, and other storage media. 

3.2 SIMPLEX, HALF DUPLEX, FULL DUPLEX 

The  term transmission  mode refers  to  the  transmission  of  information  between  two 

communication  devices  via  an interaction  channel that  indicates  the direction of 

information  flow  between  the  devices.  There  are three primary  types  of  transmission 

modes  based  on  the  direction  of  the  exchange  of  information.  The  first  is simplex, 

followed by half duplex, and finally full duplex. 

                                                         Figure 3.2 Transmission modes 

27 

 
 
          
 
  Simplex:  

In simplex mode, the communication is unidirectional. Only one of the two devices on 

a  link  can  transmit;  the  other  can  only  receive  (see  Figure  3.2.1).  Keyboards  and 

traditional monitors are examples of simplex devices. The keyboard can only introduce 

input; the monitor can only accept output. The simplex mode can use the entire capacity 

of the channel to send data in one direction. 

     Figure 3.2.1: Simplex communication 

Advantages 

o  The  station  can  broadcast  more data at  once  when  operating  in simplex 

mode since it can use the complete bandwidth of the communication channel. 

o 

In  a  simplex  mode  of  transmission,  radio  stations  can  use  the complete 

bandwidth of the communicating channel to send all data in one shot with no data 

loss. 

Disadvantages 

o  The simplex transmission mode is  primarily  utilized in  corporate  environments 

where  rapid  response  is  not  necessary  because  communications  primarily 

involve two-way data exchange. 

o  Since  device  communication 

is unidirectional in  simplex  mode, 

there 

is 

no intercommunication between them. 

  Half-Duplex: 

 In half-duplex mode, both the stations can transmit and receive, but not at the same time. 

When one device is sending, the other can only receive, and vice versa (see Figure 3.2.2). 

In a half-duplex transmission, the entire capacity of a channel is taken over by whichever 

of  the  two  devices  is  transmitting  at  the  time.  Walkie-talkies  and  CB  (citizens  band) 

28 

 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
radios are both half-duplex systems. The half-duplex mode is used in cases where there 

is no need for communication in both directions at the same time; the entire capacity of 

the channel can be utilized for each direction. 

                                   Figure 3.2.2: Half-Duplex communication 

           Advantages 

o 

In half duplex mode, error detection is available, and if an error occurs, the 
receiver demands that the sender retransmit the data. 

o  Since this method of transmission allows for two-way communication, the entire 
bandwidth of the communication channel is used in only one direction at a time. 

Disadvantages 

o  In half duplex mode, when one of the devices is sending the data, then another 
one has to wait. This causes a delay in sending the data at the right time. 

  Full-Duplex:  

In full-duplex, both stations can transmit and receive simultaneously. In full-duplex 

mode, signals going in one direction share the capacity of the link with signals going in 

the other direction. This sharing can occur in two ways. Either the link must contain 

two physically separate transmission paths, one for sending and the other for receiving; 

or the capacity of the channel is divided between signals traveling in both directions. 

29 

 
 
 
One common example of full-duplex communication is the telephone network. When 

two people are communicating by a telephone line, both can talk and listen at the same 

time. The full-duplex mode is used when communication in both directions is required 

all the time. The capacity of the channel, however, must be divided between the two 

directions. 

Advantages 

o  The full duplex transmission mode is the fastest because the transmission 

happens in both ways. 

o  Both stations can send and receive data simultaneously. 

Disadvantages 

o 

If no dedicated path exists between the devices, the communication channel's 

capacity is divided into two parts. 

3.3 LAN, MAN, WAN. 

A Local Area Network (LAN) is a group of computer and peripheral devices which are 

connected in a limited area such as school, laboratory, home, and office building. It is a 

widely  useful  network  for  sharing  resources  like  files,  printers,  games,  and  other 

application. The simplest type of LAN network is to connect computers and a printer in 

someone’s home or office. In general,  LAN will be used as one type of transmission 

medium. It is a network which consists of less than 5000 interconnected devices across 

several buildings. 

30 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
           
                                          Figure 3.3.1 Local area Network 

  Characteristics of LAN 

Here are the important characteristics of a LAN network: 

o 

It is a private network, so an outside regulatory body never controls it. 

o  LAN operates at a relatively higher speed compared to other WAN systems. 

o  There are various kinds of media access control methods like token ring and 

Ethernet. 

  Advantages of LAN 

Here are the pros/benefits of LAN: 

o  Computer resources like hard-disks, DVD-ROM, and printers can share local 

area networks. This significantly reduces the cost of hardware purchases. 

o  You can use the same software over the network instead of purchasing the 

licensed software for each client in the network. 

o  Data of all network users can be stored on a single hard disk of the server 

computer. 

o  You can easily transfer data and messages over networked computers. 

o 

It will be easy to manage data at only one place, which makes data more secure. 

o  Local Area Network offers the facility to share a single internet connection 

among all the LAN users. 

31 

 
                           
                        
 
 
  Disadvantages of LAN 

Here are the cons/drawbacks of LAN: 

o  LAN will indeed save cost because of shared computer resources, but the initial 

cost of installing Local Area Networks is quite high. 

o  The LAN admin can check personal data files of every LAN user, so it does not 

offer good privacy. 

o  Unauthorized users can access critical data of an organization in case LAN admin 

is not able to secure centralized data repository. 

o  Local Area Network requires a constant LAN administration as there are issues 

related to software setup and hardware failures 

  What is WAN (Wide Area Network)? 

WAN (Wide Area Network) is another important computer network that which is spread 

across a large geographical area. WAN network system could be a connection of a LAN 

which connects with other LAN’s using telephone lines and radio waves. It is mostly 

limited to an enterprise or an organization. 

                                              Figure 3.3.2 Wide Area Network 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
  Characteristics of WAN 

Below are the characteristics of WAN: 

o  The software files will be shared among all the users; therefore, all can access to 

the latest files. 

o  Any organization can form its global integrated network using WAN. 

  Advantages of WAN 

Here are the benefits/pros of WAN: 

o  WAN helps you to cover a larger geographical area. Therefore, business offices 

situated at longer distances can easily communicate. 

o  Contains devices like mobile phones, laptop, tablet, computers, gaming consoles, 

etc. 

o  WLAN connections work using radio transmitters and receivers built into client 

devices. 

  Disadvantages of WAN 

Here are the drawbacks/cons of WAN network: 

o  The initial setup cost of investment is very high. 

o 

It is difficult to maintain the WAN network. You need skilled technicians and 

network administrators. 

o  There are more errors and issues because of the wide coverage and the use of 

different technologies. 

o 

It requires more time to resolve issues because of the involvement of multiple 

wired and wireless technologies. 

o  Offers lower security compared to other types of network in computer. 

  What is MAN (Metropolitan Area Network)? 

  A Metropolitan Area Network or MAN is consisting of a computer network across 

an entire city, college campus, or a small region. This type of network is large than a 

LAN, which is mostly limited to a single building or site. Depending upon the type of 

33 

 
configuration, this type of network allows you to cover an area from several miles to 

tens of miles. 

Figure 3.3.3 Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) 

  Characteristics of MAN 

Here are important characteristics of the MAN network: 

o 

It mostly covers towns and cities in a maximum 50 km range 

o  Mostly used medium is optical fibers, cables 

o  Data rates adequate for distributed computing applications. 

  Advantages of MAN 

Here are the pros/benefits of MAN network: 

o 

o 

It offers fast communication using high-speed carriers, like fiber optic cables. 

It provides excellent support for an extensive size network and greater access to 

WANs. 

o  The dual bus in MAN network provides support to transmit data in both 

directions concurrently. 

o  A MAN network mostly includes some areas of a city or an entire city. 

  Disadvantages of MAN 

Here are drawbacks/cons of using the MAN network: 

o  You need more cable to establish MAN connection from one place to another. 

o 

In MAN network it is tough to make the system secure from hackers 

34 

 
 
 
  Other Types of Computer Networks 

Apart from above mentioned computer networks, here are some other important types 

of networks: 

o  WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) 

o  Storage Area Network 

o  System Area Network 

o  Home Area Network 

o  POLAN- Passive Optical LAN 

o  Enterprise private network 

o  Campus Area Network 

o  Virtual Area Network 

o  Let’s see all these different types of networks in detail: 

1) WLAN 

WLAN (Wireless  Local  Area Network) helps  you to  link single or multiple devices 

using  wireless  communication  within  a  limited  area  like  home,  school,  or  office 

building. It gives users an ability to move around within a local coverage area which 

may be connected to the network. Today most modern day’s WLAN systems are based 

on IEEE 802.11 standards. 

2) Storage-Area Network (SAN) 

A Storage Area Network is a type of network which allows consolidated, block-level 

data  storage.  It  is  mainly  used  to  make  storage  devices,  like  disk  arrays,  optical 

jukeboxes, and tape libraries. 

3) System-Area Network 

System Area Network is used for a local network. It offers high-speed connection in 

server-to-server and processor-to-processor applications. The computers connected on 

a SAN network operate as a single system at quite high speed. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4) Passive Optical Local Area Network 

POLAN  is  a  networking  technology  which  helps  you  to  integrate  into  structured 

cabling. It allows you to resolve the issues of supporting Ethernet protocols and network 

apps. POLAN allows you to use optical splitter which helps you to separate an optical 

signal  from  a  single-mode  optical  fiber.  It  converts  this  single  signal  into  multiple 

signals. 

5) Home Area Network (HAN): 

A Home Area Network is always built using two or more interconnected computers to 

form a local area network (LAN) within the home. For example, in the United States, 

about 15 million homes have more than one computer. 

These  types  of  network  connections  help  computer  owners  to  interconnect  with 

multiple computers. This network allows sharing files, programs, printers, and other 

peripherals. 

6) Enterprise Private Network: 

Enterprise  private  network  (EPN)  networks  are  build  and  owned  by  businesses  that 

want  to  securely  connect  numerous  locations  in  order  to  share  various  computer 

resources. 

7) Campus Area Network (CAN): 

A Campus Area Network is made up of an interconnection of LANs within a specific 

geographical area. For example, a university campus can be linked with a variety of 

campus buildings to connect all the academic departments. 

8) Virtual Private Network: 

A VPN is a private network which uses a public network to connect remote sites or 

users together. The VPN network uses “virtual” connections routed through the internet 

from the enterprise’s private network or a third-party VPN service to the remote site. It 

is a free or paid service that keeps your web browsing secure and private over public 

Wi-Fi hotspots. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4 DNS, IP ADDRESS, MAC ADDRESS 

 The Application Layer:  The application layer is the top  most layer on the network 

model  where  all  the  applications  are  found.  Application  layer  consists  of  application 

protocols  that  provide  services  to  user  applications.  The  layers  below  the  application 

layer provide reliable transport and they do not involve in helping users directly. 

However, even in the application layer there is a need for support protocols, to allow the 

applications to function. Accordingly, we will look at one of these before starting with 

the applications themselves. The item in question is DNS, which handles naming within 

the Internet. After that, we will examine real application like electronic mail.  

The Domain Name System (DNS) is a hierarchical naming system built on a distributed 

database for computers, services, or any resource connected to the Internet or a private 

network. It associates various information with domain names assigned to each of the 

participating  entities.  Most  importantly,  it  translates  domain  names  meaningful  to 

humans  into  the  numerical  identifiers  associated  with  networking  equipment  for  the 

purpose of locating and addressing these devices worldwide. 

Although programs theoretically could refer to hosts, mailboxes, and other resources by 

their network (e.g., IP) addresses, these addresses are hard for people to remember. Also, 

sending e-mail to tana@128.111.24.41 means that if Tana's ISP or organization moves 

the mail server to a different machine with a different IP address, her e-mail address has 

to  change.  Consequently,  ASCII  names  were  introduced  to  decouple  machine  names 

from  machine  addresses.  In  this  way,  Tana's  address  might  be  something  like 

tana@art.ucsb.edu.  Nevertheless,  the  network  itself  understands  only  numerical 

addresses,  so  some  mechanism  is  required  to  convert  the  ASCII  strings  to  network 

addresses. In the following sections we will study how this mapping is accomplished in 

the Internet. Way back in the ARPANET, there was simply a file, hosts.txt that listed all 

the hosts and their IP addresses. Every night, all the hosts would fetch it from the site at 

which it was maintained. For a network of a few hundred large timesharing machines, 

this approach worked reasonably well.  

However,  when  thousands  of  minicomputers  and  PCs  were  connected  to  the  net, 

everyone realized that this approach could not continue to work forever. For one thing, 

37 

 
           
 
the size of the file would become too large. However, even more important, host name 

conflicts  would  occur  constantly  unless  names  were  centrally  managed,  something 

unthinkable in a huge international network due to the load and latency. To solve these 

problems, DNS (the Domain Name System) was invented. The essence of DNS is the 

invention  of  a  hierarchical,  domain-based  naming  scheme  and  a  distributed  database 

system  for  implementing  this  naming  scheme.  It  is  primarily  used  for  mapping  host 

names and e-mail destinations to IP addresses but can also be used for other purposes. 

DNS is defined in RFCs 1034 and 1035.   

  The DNS Name Space 

Managing a large and constantly changing set of names is a nontrivial problem. In the 

postal system, name management is done by requiring letters to specify (implicitly or 

explicitly) the country, state or province, city, and street address of the addressee. By 

using  this  kind  of  hierarchical  addressing,  there  is  no  confusion  between  the  Marvin 

Anderson on Main St. in White Plains, N.Y. and the Marvin Anderson on Main St. in 

Austin, Texas. DNS works the same way.  

Conceptually,  the  Internet  is  divided  into  over  200  top-level  domains,  where  each 

domain covers many hosts. Each domain is partitioned into sub domains, and these are 

further partitioned, and so on. All these domains can be represented by a tree, as shown 

in Fig. 3.4.1. The leaves of the tree represent domains that have no sub domains (but do 

contain machines, of course). A namespace maps each address to a unique name. These 

can be represented by a tree representing domain and sub domains. The leaves of the 

tree  represent  domains  that  do  not  have  any  further  sub  domain.  A  leaf  domain  may 

contain a single host or group hosts (representing a company or any community).  

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                            Figure 3.4.1. A portion of the Internet domain name space. 

The top-level domains come in two flavors: generic and countries. The original generic 

domains were com (commercial), edu (educational institutions), gov (the U.S. Federal 

Government), int (certain international organizations), mil (the U.S. armed forces), net 

(network  providers),  and  org  (nonprofit  organizations).  The  country  domains  include 

one entry for every country, as defined in ISO 3166.  

In  November  2000,  ICANN  approved  four  new,  general-purpose,  top-level  domains, 

namely,  biz  (businesses),  info  (information),  name  (people's  names),  and  pro 

(professions, such as doctors and lawyers). In addition, three more specialized top-level 

domains were introduced at the request of certain industries. These are aero (aerospace 

industry), coop (co-operatives), and museum (museums). Other top-level domains will 

be added in the future.  

In  general,  getting  a  second-level  domain,  such  as  name-of-company.com,  is  easy.  It 

merely requires going to a registrar for the corresponding top-level domain (com in this 

case) to  check if the desired name is available and not somebody else's trademark. If 

there are no problems, the requester pays a small annual fee and gets the name. By now, 

virtually  every  common  (English)  word  has  been  taken  in  the  com  domain.  Try 

household articles, animals, plants, body parts, etc. Nearly all are taken.  

39 

 
                   
 
                   
 
 
 
Each  domain  is  named  by  the  path  upward  from  it  to  the  (unnamed)  root.  The 

components  are  separated  by  periods  (pronounced  ''dot'').  Thus,  the  engineering 

department at Sun Microsystems might be eng.sun.com, rather than a UNIX-style name 

such as /com/sun/eng. Notice that this hierarchical naming means that eng.sun.com. does 

not conflict with a potential use of eng in eng.yale.edu., which might be used by the Yale 

English department. 

Domain names can be either absolute or relative. An absolute domain name always ends 

with a period (e.g., eng.sun.com.), whereas a relative one does not. Relative names have 

to be interpreted in some context to uniquely determine their true meaning. In both cases, 

a named domain refers to a specific node in the tree and all the nodes under it.  

Domain  names  are  case  insensitive,  so  edu,  Edu,  and  EDU  mean  the  same  thing. 

Component names can be up to 63 characters long, and full path names must not exceed 

255 characters. In principle, domains can be inserted into the tree in two different ways. 

For example, cs.yale.edu could equally well be listed under the US country domain as 

cs.yale.ct.us. In practice, however, most organizations in the United States are under a 

generic  domain,  and  most  outside  the  United  States  are  under  the  domain  of  their 

country.  There  is  no  rule  against  registering  under  two  top-level  domains,  but  few 

organizations except multinationals do it (e.g., sony.com and sony.nl).  

Each  domain  controls  how  it  allocates  the  domains  under  it.  For  example,  Japan  has 

domains ac.jp and co.jp that mirror edu and com. The Netherlands does not make this 

distinction and puts all organizations directly under nl. Thus, all three of the following 

are university computer science departments:  

1. cs.yale.edu (Yale University, in the United States)  

2. cs.vu.nl (Vrije University, in The Netherlands)  

3. cs. keio.ac.jp (Keio University, in Japan)  

To  create  a  new  domain,  permission  is  required  of  the  domain  in  which  it  will  be 

included.  For  example,  if  a  VLSI  group  is  started  at  Yale  and  wants  to  be  known  as 

vlsi.cs.yale.edu, it has to get permission from whoever manages cs.yale.edu. Similarly, 

if a new university is chartered, say, the University of Northern South Dakota, it must 

ask the manager of the edu domain to assign it unsd.edu. In this way, name conflicts are 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
avoided and each domain can keep track of all its sub domains. Once a new domain has 

been  created  and  registered,  it  can  create  sub  domains,  such  as  cs.unsd.edu,  without 

getting permission from anybody higher up the tree.  

Naming follows organizational boundaries, not physical networks. For example, if the 

computer science and electrical engineering departments are located in the same building 

and share the same LAN, they can nevertheless have distinct domains. Similarly, even 

if  computer  science  is  split  over  Babbage  Hall  and  Turing  Hall,  the  hosts  in  both 

buildings will normally belong to the same domain.  

  IP Address 

A  network  address  always  points  to  host  /  node  /  server  or  it  can  represent  a  whole 

network.  Network  address  is  always  configured  on  network  interface  card  and  is 

generally  mapped  by  system  with  the  MAC  address  (hardware  address  or  layer-2 

address) of the machine for Layer-2 communication. 

There are different kinds of network addresses in existence: 

o 

o 

IP 

IPX 

o  AppleTalk 

We are discussing IP here as it is the only one we use in practice these days. 

IP addressing provides mechanism to differentiate between hosts and network. Because 

IP addresses are assigned in hierarchical manner, a host always resides under a specific 

41 

 
 
 
 
network.  The  host  which  needs  to  communicate  outside  its  subnet,  needs  to  know 

destination network address, where the packet/data is to be sent. 

Hosts in different subnet need a mechanism to locate each other. This task can be done 

by DNS. DNS is a server which provides Layer-3 address of remote host mapped with 

its domain name or FQDN. When a host acquires the Layer-3 Address (IP Address) of 

the remote host, it forwards all its packet to its gateway. A gateway is a router equipped 

with all the information which leads to route packets to the destination host. 

Routers take help of routing tables, which has the following information: 

  Method to reach the network 

Routers upon receiving a forwarding request, forwards packet to its next hop (adjacent 

router) towards the destination. 

The next router on the path follows the same thing and eventually the data packet reaches 

its destination. 

Network address can be of one of the following: 

o  Unicast (destined to one host) 

o  Multicast (destined to group) 

o  Broadcast (destined to all) 

o  Anycast (destined to nearest one) 

A  router  never  forwards  broadcast  traffic  by  default.  Multicast  traffic  uses  special 

treatment  as  it  is  most  a  video  stream  or  audio  with  highest  priority.  Anycast  is  just 

similar to unicast, except that the packets are delivered to the nearest destination when 

multiple destinations are available. 

Computer network is a group of computers or nodes that are linked to each other to share 

information and resources. Whereas, IP addresses are generally represented by a 32-bit 

unsigned binary value. It is represented in a dotted decimal format. 

For example, 9.250.7.5 is a valid IP address. 

The IP address consists of a pair of numbers  

IP address = <network number><host number> 

Let see the pictorial representation of two hosts that are communicated with the help of 

Network and IP address. 

42 

 
 
  Explanation 

Step 1 − The service that is used to convert the Domain name to IP address is called 

Domain Name Service. 

Step 2 − The port number is used to Identify a particular host, for well-known services 

the port numbers are predefined and fixed. 

For example  

http=>port number=80 

ftp=> port number=21 

SMTP=> Port number=25 

Step 3 − Even though our intention is to reach google.com, we have to visit DNS first 

and  then  getting  the  IP  address  of  google.com  we  will  get  the  google  home  page. 

Actually this is overhead, also called DNS overhead. This problem can be rectified when 

we  get  the  IP  address  of google.com.  For the first  time, we need to  store that in  our 

personal system for some time. Later on, when we try to access the site again we can 

get the IP address directly from our system. By doing this there is no need to get DNS 

for every time access which reduces the overheads. If the IP address expires then there 

is no other alternative, we have to go to DNS.IP addresses are used by the IP protocol 

helpful to identify a host on the Internet. Generally, speaking, an IP address identifies 

an interface that is capable of sending and Receiving IP datagrams. 

Internet Protocol hierarchy contains several classes of IP Addresses to be used efficiently 

in  various  situations  as  per  the  requirement  of  hosts  per  network.  Broadly,  the  IPv4 

Addressing system is divided into five classes of IP Addresses. All the five classes are 

43 

 
 
identified by the first octet of IP Address.Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 

Numbers is responsible for assigning IP addresses.The first octet referred here is the left 

most  of  all.  The  octets  numbered  as  follows  depicting  dotted  decimal  notation  of  IP 

Address  

The number of networks and the number of hosts per class can be derived by this formula  

When calculating hosts' IP addresses, 2 IP addresses are decreased because they cannot 

be assigned to hosts, i.e. the first IP of a network is network number and the last IP is 

reserved for Broadcast IP. 

o  Class A Address 

The first bit of the first octet is always set to 0 (zero). Thus the first octet ranges from 1 

– 127, i.e. 

Class A addresses only include IP starting from 1.x.x.x to 126.x.x.x only. The IP range 

127.x.x.x is reserved for loopback IP addresses. 

The default subnet mask for Class A IP address is 255.0.0.0 which implies that Class A 

addressing can have 126 networks (27-2) and 16777214 hosts (224-2). 

Class 

A 

IP 

address 

format 

is 

thus: 0NNNNNNN.HHHHHHHH.HHHHHHHH.HHHHHHHH 

o  Class B Address 

An IP address which belongs to class B has the first two bits in the first octet set to 10, 

i.e. 

44 

 
 
              
 
 
                                   
 
 
 
Class B IP Addresses range from 128.0.x.x to 191.255.x.x. The default subnet mask for 

Class B is 255.255.x.x. 

Class B has 16384 (214) Network addresses and 65534 (216-2) Host addresses. 

Class B IP address format is: 10NNNNNN.NNNNNNNN.HHHHHHHH.HHHHHHHH 

o  Class C Address 

The first octet of Class C IP address has its first 3 bits set to 110, that is − 

Class C IP addresses range from 192.0.0.x to 223.255.255.x. The default subnet mask 

for Class C is 255.255.255.x. 

Class C gives 2097152 (221) Network addresses and 254 (28-2) Host addresses. 

Class C IP address format is: 110NNNNN.NNNNNNNN.NNNNNNNN.HHHHHHHH 

o  Class D Address 

Very first four bits of the first octet in Class D IP addresses are set to 1110, giving a 

range of − 

Class D has IP address range from 224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255. Class D is reserved for 

Multicasting. In multicasting data is not destined for a particular host, that is why there 

is no need to extract host address from the IP address, and Class D does not have any 

subnet mask. 

o  Class E Address 

This IP Class is reserved for experimental purposes only for R&D or Study. IP addresses 

in this class ranges from 240.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.254. Like Class D, this class too is 

not equipped with any subnet mask. 

45 

 
                                        
 
 
                       
 
 
                          
 
 
 
 
  MAC Address 

In order to communicate or transfer the data from one computer to another computer, 

we  need  some  address.  In  Computer  Network  various  types  of  addresses  are 

introduced; each works at a different layer. Media Access Control Address is a physical 

address  that  works  at  the  Data  Link  Layer.  In  this  article,  we  will  discuss  about 

addressing DLL, which is MAC Address.  

o  Media Access Control (MAC) Address  

MAC  Addresses  are  unique 48-bits hardware  number  of  a  computer,  which  is 

embedded into a network card (known as a Network Interface Card) during the time 

of manufacturing. MAC Address is also known as the Physical Address of a network 

device. In IEEE 802 standard, Data Link Layer is divided into two sublayers –  

o  Logical Link Control(LLC) Sublayer 

o  Media Access Control(MAC) Sublayer 

MAC address is used by the Media Access Control (MAC) sublayer of the Data-Link 

Layer. MAC Address is worldwide unique since millions of network devices exist and 

we need to uniquely identify each.  

46 

 
 
 
  Format of MAC Address  

MAC  Address  is  a  12-digit  hexadecimal  number  (6-Byte  binary  number),  which  is 

mostly represented by Colon-Hexadecimal notation. The First 6-digits (say 00:40:96) 

of  MAC  Address  identifies  the  manufacturer,  called  OUI  (Organizational  Unique 

Identifier). IEEE Registration Authority Committee assigns these MAC prefixes to its 

registered vendors.  

Here are some OUI of well-known manufacturers : 

CC:46: D6 - Cisco  

3C:5A: B4 - Google, Inc. 

3C:D9:2B - Hewlett Packard 

00:9A:CD - HUAWEI TECHNOLOGIES CO., LTD 

The rightmost six digits represent Network Interface Controller, which is assigned 

by the manufacturer.  

As discussed above, the MAC address is represented by Colon-Hexadecimal notation. 

But this is just a conversion, not mandatory. MAC address  can be represented using 

any of the following formats: 

Note: Colon-Hexadecimal  notation  is  used  by Linux  OS and  Period-separated 

Hexadecimal notation is used by Cisco Systems.   

o  How to find MAC address?  

Command for UNIX/Linux -  ifconfig -a 

                          ip link list  

47 

 
 
 
                          ip address show 

Command forWindows OS -   ipconfig /all  

MacOS -                   TCP/IP Control Panel 

Note – LAN technologies like Token Ring, and Ethernet use MAC Addresses as their 

Physical  address  but  there  are  some  networks  (AppleTalk)  that  do  not  use  MAC 

addresses.  

  Types of MAC Address: 

1. Unicast: A Unicast  addressed frame is only sent out to the interface leading to a 

specific NIC. If the LSB (least significant bit) of the first octet of an address is set to 

zero, the  frame  is meant  to  reach  only  one  receiving  NIC.  MAC  Address  of  source 

machine is always Unicast.  

2. Multicast: The multicast address allows the source to send a frame to a group of 

devices. In Layer-2 (Ethernet) Multicast address, LSB (least significant bit) of the first 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
octet of an address is set to one. IEEE has allocated the address block 01-80-C2-xx-

xx-xx  (01-80-C2-00-00-00  to  01-80-C2-FF-FF-FF)  for  group  addresses  for  use  by 

standard protocols.  

3. Broadcast: Similar to Network Layer, Broadcast is also possible on the underlying 

layer (Data Link Layer). Ethernet frames with ones in all bits of the destination address 

(FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF)  are  referred  to  as  the  broadcast  addresses.  Frames  that  are 

destined with MAC address FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF will reach every computer belonging 

to that LAN segment.  

49 

 
 
 
 
  What is MAC Cloning: 

Some ISPs use MAC addresses in order to assign an IP address to the gateway device. 

When a device connects to the ISP, the DHCP server records the MAC address and 

then  assigns  an  IP  address.  Now  the  system  will  be  identified  through  the  MAC 

address. When the device gets disconnected, it loses the IP address. If the user wants 

to reconnect, the DHCP server checks if the device is connected before. If so, then the 

server tries to assign the same IP address (in case the lease period has not expired). In 

case user changed the router, the user has to inform the ISP about new MAC address 

because  the  new  MAC  address  is  unknown  to  ISP,  so  the  connection  cannot  be 

established.  

Or the other option is Cloning, user can simply clone the registered MAC address with 

ISP. Now router keeps reporting the old MAC  addresses to ISP and there will be no 

connection issue. 

  Characteristics of MAC address: 

Media Access Control address (MAC address) is a unique identifier assigned to most 

network  adapters  or  network  interface  cards  (NICs)  by  the  manufacturer  for 

identification and used in the Media Access Control protocol sub-layer. 

50 

 
 
An Ethernet MAC address is a 48-bit binary value expressed as 12 hexadecimal 

digits (4 bits per hexadecimal digit). MAC addresses are in a flat structure and thus 

they are not routable on the Internet. Serial interfaces do not use MAC addresses. It 

does NOT contain a network and host portion with the address. It is used to deliver 

the frame to the destination device. 

3.6 SUMMARY 

Transmission  mode,  also  known  as  a communication  mode,  is  the  transfer  of  data 

between 

two  devices  via  a  communication  channel 

that 

includes  an optical 

fiber, wireless channels, copper wires, and other storage media. The connection is either 

simplex, half duplex, Full duplex The term transmission mode refers to the transmission 

of  information  between  two  communication  devices  via  an interaction  channel that 

indicates the direction of information flow between the devices. So the LAN stands for 

local area network. MAN stands for metropolitan area network. WAN stands for wide 

area network. Operates in small areas such as the same building or campus. While IP 

addresses are used to uniquely identifies the connection of the network with that device 

takes  part  in  a  network.  MAC  Address  is  used  to  ensure  the  physical  address  of  the 

computer. It uniquely identifies the devices on a network.  

3.7 KEYWORDS 

           LAN 

           WAN 

           MAN 

           MAC 

3.8 QUESTION FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  What is Simplex mode? Explain 

2.  Explain Half-Duplex. 

3.  What is Full-Duplex? Explain 

4.  Explain LAN. 

51 

 
 
 
     
 
 
 
5.  What is WAN? Explain 

6.  Explain MAN 

7.  What is DNS? Explain 

8.  Explain IP address. 

9.  What is MAC address. 

3.9 REFERENCES 

1  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan, 4th   Edition, Tata 

McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

2  Communication Networks: Fundamental Concepts and Key Architectures - Alberto 

Leon, Garcia and Indra Widjaja, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw- Hill, 2004.  

3  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 4: WEB BROWSER 

Structure: 

4.0   Objectives 

4.1  

Introduction 

4.2  

ISP 

4.3   URL 

4.4     WWW 

4.5     Broadband Transmissions 

4.6     Guided Media – Twisted Pair Cable, Coaxial Cable, Fiber-Optic Cable 

4.7  Summary 

4.8  Keywords 

4.9  Questions for self-study 

4.10  References 

4.0   OBJECTIVES 

After studying this unit, you will be able to 

  Explain the web browser 

  Understand ISP, URL, WWW.Broad band transmission 

  Discuss the Guided Media – Twisted Pair Cable 

  State the Applications Coaxial Cable, Fiber-Optic Cable 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 

Today web browsers are easily accessible and can be used on devices like computer, 

laptops, mobile phones, etc. but this evolution of making browsers available for easy 

use took many years.  

Given below are some salient points which one must know with regard to the history 

of web browsers: 

o  “Worldwide Web” was the first web browser created by Tim Berners Lee in 

1990. This is completely different from the World Wide Web we use today  

o 

In 1993, the “Mosaic” web browser was released. It had the feature of adding 

images and an innovative graphical interface. It was the “the world’s first 

popular browser” 

o  After this, in 1994, Marc Andreessen (leader of Mosaic Team) started working 

on a new web browser, which was released and was named “Netscape 

Navigator” 

o 

In 1995, “Internet Explorer” was launched by Microsoft. It soon overtook as 

the most popular web browser 

o 

In 2002, “Mozilla Firefox” was introduced which was equally as competent as 

Internet Explorer 

o  Apple too launched a web browser in the year 2003 and named it “Safari”. This 

browser is commonly used in Apple devices only and not popular with other 

devices 

o  Finally, in the year 2008, Google released “Chrome” and within a time span of 3 

years it took over all the other existing browsers and is one of the most 

commonly used web browsers across the world 

  Functions of Web Browser 

Our dependency on the Internet has massively increased. Stated below are functions of 

web browsers and how are they useful: 

o  The main function is to retrieve information from the World Wide Web and 

making it available for users 

54 

 
 
o  Visiting any website can be done using a web browser. When a URL is entered 

in a browser, the web server takes us to that website 

o  To run Java applets and flash content, plugins are available on the web browser 

o 

It makes Internet surfing easy as once we reach a website we can easily check 

the hyperlinks and get more and more useful data online 

o  Browsers user internal cache which gets stored and the user can open the same 

webpage time and again without losing extra data  

o  Multiple webpages can be opened at the same time on a web browser 

o  Options like back, forward, reload, stop reload, home, etc. are available on these 

web browsers, which make using them easy and convenient 

  Types of Web Browser 

The functions of all web browsers are the same. Thus, more than the different types 

there are different web browsers which have been used over the years. 

Discussed below are different web browser examples and their specific features: 

  Worldwide Web 

o  The first web browser ever 

o  Launched in 1990 

o 

It was later named “Nexus” to avoid any confusion with the World Wide Web 

o  Had the very basic features and less interactive in terms of graphical interface 

o  Did not have the feature of bookmark 

  Mosaic 

o 

It was launched in 1993 

o  The second web browser which was launched 

o  Had a better graphical interface. Images, text and graphics could all be integrated 

o 

It was developed at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications 

o  The team which was responsible for creating Mosaic was lead by Marc 

Andreessen 

o 

It was named “the world’s first popular browser” 

  Netscape Navigator 

o 

o 

It was released in 1994 

In the 1990s, it was the dominant browser in terms of usage share 

55 

 
o  More versions of this browser were launched by Netscape 

o 

It had an advanced licensing scheme and allowed free usage for non-commercial 

purposes 

  Internet Explorer 

o 

It was launched in 1995 by Microsoft 

o  By 2003, it has attained almost 95% of usage share and had become the most 

popular browsers of all 

o  Close to 10 versions of Internet Explorer were released by Microsoft and were 

updated gradually 

o 

o 

It was included in the Microsoft Windows operating system 

In 2015, it was replaced with “Microsoft Edge”, as it became the default browser 

on Windows 10 

  Firefox 

o 

It was introduced in 2002 and was developed by Mozilla Foundation 

o  Firefox overtook the usage share from Internet Explorer and became the 

dominant browser during 2003-04 

o  Location-aware browsing was made available with Firefox 

o  This browser was also made available for mobile phones, tablets, etc. 

  Google Chrome 

o  It was launched in 2008 by Google 

o  It is a cross-platform web browser 

o  Multiple features from old browsers were amalgamated to form better and newer 

features 

o  To save computers from malware, Google developed the ad-blocking feature to 

keep the user data safe and secure 

o  Incognito mode is provided where private searching is available where no 

cookies or history is saved 

o  Till date, it has the best user interface 

o  Apart from these, Opera Mini web browser was introduced in 2005 which was 

specially designed for mobile users. Before the mobile version, the computer 

56 

 
version “Opera” was also released in 1995. It supported a decent user interface 

and was developed by Opera Software. 

4.2 ISP (Internet Service Provider) 

ISP stands for Internet Service  Provider which is a term used to refer to  a company 

that  provides  internet  access  to  people  who  pay  the  company  or  subscribe  to  the 

company for the same. For their services, the customers have to pay the internet service 

provider a nominal fee which varies according to the amount of data they actually use 

or the data plan which they purchase. An Internet Service Provider is also known as an 

Internet Access Provider or an online service provider. An Internet Service Provider is 

a must if one wants to connect to the internet. The first Internet Service Provider was 

Telenet. Telenet was the commercialized version of the ARPANET  – a precursor to 

the  internet,  of  sorts.  Telenet  was  introduced  in  1974.  Since  then,  many  Internet 

Service  Providers  have  entered  the  scene  and  this  was  partly  because  of  the 

proliferation of the internet as a commodity that fuelled the consumerist attitude of the 

people. Pretty soon, an Internet Service Provider called “The World” came to be in 

vogue and ever since it started serving its customers today in 1989 has cemented itself 

as the first archetypal Internet Service Provider. Examples of major Internet Service 

Providers include Google Fiber, Verizon, Jio, AT&T etc.  

  Characteristics 

o  E-mail  Account: Many  Internet  Service  Providers  offer  an  e-mail  address  to 

their consumers. 

o  User  Support: Professionals  and  an  increasing  number  of  lay  users  prefer  an 

ISP that can provide them with customer support so that they have someone they 

can refer to if things go awry. 

o  Access to high-speed internet: Probably the most obvious item on this list as 

this feature of an Internet Service Provider lies literally in its name. Furthermore, 

the higher the speed an Internet Service Provider can offer one, the better it’s 

standing in the market and the more customers it can attract. 

o  Spam  Blocker: An  Internet  Service  Provider  that  hinders  its  customers’ 

productivity  by  way  of  not  blocking  spam  and  displaying  frequent  ads  is  not 

57 

 
 
 
something that is generally favoured in the market today. Therefore, many of the 

Internet Service Providers offer spam blocking features to their customers. 

o  Web Hosting: Some of the ISPs offer web hosting services to their clientele as 

well. 

  Different types of ISP connections 

o  DSL 

o  Wi-Fi broadband 

o  mobile broadband 

o 

fibre optic broadband 

o  cable broadband 

  List of ISP 

o  Reliance Jio 

o  Vodafone Idea 

o  Airtel 

o  BSNL 

o  Hathway 

  Advantages 

o  The customer need not then bother with either the technicalities or finances of 

investing and inventing a web browser to work with. An ISP can readily do all 

of this for its customers. 

o  Many ISPs, being professional companies, provide its clientele with high-speed 

internet and that is not possible if one decides to sidesteps these companies. 

o 

ISPs offer a very high degree of reliability and availability 

o  The ISPs are secure – they offer a tremendous deal of protection against 

viruses and use only the latest software patches whilst operating and thereby, 

maintaining the integrity of the browser. 

o  User do not need to invest in user’s own web server. 

o 

ISP’s should give the best uptime guarantee. 

58 

 
 
 
  
   Disadvantages 

o  Because of the range of options available in the market and due to cut-throat 

competition, some of the ISPs have been accused of violating the customers’ 

trust by way of inflated pricing, data losses, etc. It is true that using an ISP 

makes the customer entirely dependent on it. 

o 

If an Internet Service Provider is stretched thin because of hosting too many 

sites on a shared server, it can compromise the quality of the customers’ data 

by way of slow download rates and poor performance of websites. 

o  User need to trust user’s ISP for uptime and security. 

o 

ISP can directly affect user if the it gets blacklisted. 

4.3 URL (Uniform Resource Locator) 

A URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is a unique identifier used to locate a resource on 

the Internet.  It is also referred to as a web address. URLs consist of multiple parts  -- 

including  a  protocol  and  domain  name  --  that  tell  a  web  browser  how  and  where  to 

retrieve a resource. End users use URLs by typing them directly into the address bar of 

a browser or by clicking a hyperlink found on a webpage, bookmark list, in an email or 

from another application. 

  How is a URL structured? 

The URL contains the name of the protocol needed to access a resource, as well as a 

resource name. The first part of a URL identifies what protocol to use as the primary 

access medium. The second part identifies the IP address or domain name -- and possibly 

subdomain  --  where  the  resource  is  located.URL  protocols  include HTTP (Hypertext 

Transfer  Protocol)  and HTTPS (HTTP  Secure)  for  web  resources,  mail  to  for  email 

addresses, FTP for files on a File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server, and telnet for a session 

to  access  remote  computers.  Most  URL  protocols  are  followed  by  a  colon  and  two 

forward slashes; "mail to" is followed only by a colon. 

Optionally, after the domain, a URL can also specify: 

o  a path to a specific page or file within a domain; 

59 

 
 
 
o  a network port to use to make the connection; 

o  a specific reference point within a file, such as a named anchor in an HTML file; 

and 

o  a query or search parameters used -- commonly found in URLs for search results. 

  Importance of a URL design 

URLs can only be sent over the Internet using the ASCII character-set. Because URLs 

often  contain  non-ASCII  characters,  the  URL  must  be  converted  into  a  valid  ASCII 

format. URL encoding replaces unsafe ASCII characters with a "%" followed by two 

hexadecimal digits. URLs cannot contain spaces. 

  URL examples 

When designing URLs, there are different theories about how to make the syntax most 

usable for readers and archivists. For example, in the  URL's path, dates, authors, and 

topics can be included in a section referred to as the "slug." Consider, for example, the 

URL for this definition: 

https://www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/definition/URL 

Look past the protocol (identified as HTTPS) and the permalink (www.techtarget.com) 

and we see the file path includes two paths (search networking and definition) and the 

title of the definition (URL). 

60 

 
 
Additionally,  some  URL  designers  choose  to  put  the  date  of  the  post,  typically,  as 

(YYYY/MM/DD). 

  Parts of a URL 

Using 

the  URL https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/search/query?q=URL as  an 

example, components of a URL can include: 

o  The  protocol  or  scheme. Used  to  access  a  resource  on  the  internet.  Protocols 

include  http,  https,  ftps,  mailto  and  file.  The  resource  is  reached  through  the 

domain name system (DNS) name. In this example, the protocol is https. 

o  Host name or domain name. The unique reference the represents a webpage. For 

this example, whatis.techtarget.com. 

o  Port name. Usually not visible in URLs, but necessary. Always following a colon, 

port 80 is the default port for web servers, but there are other options. For example, 

port80. 

o  Path. A  path  refers  to  a  file  or  location  on  the  web  server.  For  this  example, 

search/query. 

o  Query. Found  in  the  URL  of dynamic  pages.  The  query  consists  of  a  question 

mark, followed by parameters. For this example, ?. 

o  Parameters. Pieces  of  information  in  a  query  string  of  a  URL.  Multiple 

parameters can be separated by ampersands (&). For this example, q=URL. 

o  Fragment. This is an internal page reference, which refers to a section within the 

webpage. It appears at the end of a URL and begins with a hashtag (#). Although 

not  in  the  example  above,  an  example  could  be  #history  in  the  URL 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet#History. 

Other examples of parts of a URL can include: 

o  The URL mailto: president@whitehouse.gov initiates a new email addressed to 

the mailbox president in the domain whitehouse.gov. 

61 

 
o  The  URL ftp://www.companyname.com/whitepapers/widgets.ps specifies  the 

use of the FTP protocol to download a file. 

4.4 WWW (World wide web) 

The World Wide Web is abbreviated as WWW and is commonly known as the web. 

The  WWW  was  initiated  by  CERN  (European  library  for  Nuclear  Research)  in 

1989. WWW can be defined as the collection of different websites around the world, 

containing different information shared via local servers (or computers). It is a project 

created, by Timothy Berner Lee in 1989, for researchers to work together effectively 

at CERN. is an organization, named the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), which 

was developed for further development of the web. This organization is directed by 

Tim Berner’s Lee, aka the father of the web.  

  System Architecture:  

From the user’s point of view, the web consists of a vast, worldwide connection of 

documents or web pages. Each page may contain links to other pages anywhere in the 

world.  The  pages  can  be  retrieved  and  viewed  by  using  browsers  of  which  internet 

explorer,  Netscape  Navigator,  Google  Chrome,  are  the  popular  ones.  The  browser 

fetches  the  page  requested  interprets  the  text  and  formatting  commands  on  it,  and 

displays the page, properly formatted, on the screen. The basic model of how the web 

works are shown in the figure below. Here the browser is displaying a web page on the 

client machine. When the user clicks on a line of text that is linked to a page on the 

abd.com  server,  the  browser  follows  the  hyperlink  by  sending  a  message  to  the 

abd.com server asking it for the page.  

62 

 
 
 
 
 
Here the browser displays a web page on the client machine when the user clicks on 

a line of text that is linked to a page on abd.com, the browser follows the hyperlink 

by sending a message to the abd.com server asking for the page.  

  Working of WWW:  

The  World  Wide  Web  is  based  on  several  different  technologies:  Web  browsers, 

Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) and Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP).  

A Web browser is used to access web pages. Web browsers can be defined as programs 

which display text, data, pictures, animation and video on the Internet. Hyperlinked 

resources on the World Wide Web can be accessed using software interfaces provided 

by Web browsers. Initially, Web browsers were used only for surfing the Web but now 

they  have  become  more  universal.  Web  browsers  can  be  used  for  several  tasks 

including conducting searches, mailing, transferring files, and much more. Some of 

the commonly used browsers are Internet Explorer, Opera Mini, and Google Chrome.  

  Features of WWW:  

o  Hypertext Information System  

o  Cross-Platform  

o  Distributed  

o  Open Standards and Open Source  

63 

 
 
 
 
o  Uses Web Browsers to provide a single interface for many services  

o  Dynamic, Interactive and Evolving.  

o  “Web2.0”  

  Components of the Web:  

There are 3 components of the web:  

1.  Uniform  Resource  Locator  (URL): serves  as  a  system  for  resources  on  the 

web.  

2.  Hypertext  Transfer  Protocol  (HTTP): specifies  communication  of  browser 

and server.  

3.  Hyper Text  Markup  Language (HTML): defines the structure, organization 

and content of a webpage.  

4.5 Broadband Transmission 

Broadband Transmission is  a signalling system  that  transfers electromagnetic energy-

carrying received signals across a wide frequency range. A broadband service's capacity 

often allows for constant transmission of several data transfers. Broadband offers high-

speed  internet  service  through  various  techniques,  including fiber  optic  cables, 

connectivity modes, cables, DSL, and satellites. 

Broadband describes several high-capacity communication standards that can send data, 

phone calls, and videos over distant locations and at incredibly fast speeds. It may use 

multiple communication channels simultaneously. Each data channel is represented by 

modulation on a particular frequency band for which sending or receiving equipment 

must  be  tuned.  Dial-up  is  no  longer  necessary  thanks  to  broadband,  which  is  always 

accessible. Its impact is wide-ranging since it enables videoconferencing, data transfer, 

high-quality and fast accessibility of information, and other things in various contexts 

like healthcare, learning, and technical advancement. 

  How the Transmission Works 

An Analog signal is how data is transmitted over broadband. Several communications 

may co-occur because each transmission is given a specific network bandwidth. Since 

64 

 
  
  
 
 
the broadband transmission is linear, two channels are required to transmit and receive 

information.  

This might be performed by using two wires, one for transmitting and one for providing 

or by designating frequencies for transmitting and another for receiving very much along 

the line. Frequency-division combining is possible with broadband. 

  Transmission Techniques 

Various transmission techniques are part of broadband, including: 

o  Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) 

o  Cable Modem 

o  Fiber 

o  Wireless 

o  Satellite 

o  Broadband over Power lines (BPL) 

Various  elements  would  influence  your  decision  about  broadband  technology.  Some 

factors  include  your  location  (urban  or  rural),  broadband  access  to  the  network  is 

bundled with other things (such as voice calling and entertainment systems), the cost, 

and usage level. 

  Example 

 An  undergraduate  student,  needs  a  broadband  connection  because  she  has  to 

continuously join online classes, research for her assignments, and watch educational 

videos. The internet connection is much needed for her to have a smooth operation.  

To have a Wi-Fi network connection, broadband is a must because through this, data can 

be transferred to PC, Mobile phones and other devices. It is a single system (wire) that 

can transport many signals at the same time. 

o  In broadband,  high-speed  data  transfer,  a  wired  connection  can  simultaneously 

transport massive amounts of data. 

o  Multiple signals are sent on different frequencies using broadband activation. 

4.6 Guided Media – Twisted Pair Cable, Coaxial Cable, Fiber-Optic Cable 

Networking to be effective, raw stream of data is to be transported from one device to 

other over some medium. Various transmission media can be used for transfer of data. 

65 

 
 
 
 
 These transmission media may be of two types  

o  Guided − In guided media, transmitted data travels through cabling system that 

has a fixed path. For example, copper wires, fibre optic wires, etc. 

o  Unguided −  In  unguided  media,  transmitted  data  travels  through  free  space  in 

form of electromagnetic signal. For example, radio waves, lasers, etc. 

Each  transmission  media  has  its  own  advantages  and  disadvantages  in  terms  of 

bandwidth,  speed, delay, cost  per bit, ease of installation  and maintenance, etc.  Let’s 

discuss some of the most commonly used media in detail. 

  Twisted Pair Cable 

Copper wires are the most common wires used for transmitting signals because of good 

performance at low costs. They are most commonly used in telephone lines. However, 

if two or more wires are lying together, they can interfere with each other’s signals. To 

reduce  this  electromagnetic  interference,  pair  of  copper  wires  are  twisted  together  in 

helical shape like a DNA molecule. Such twisted copper wires are called twisted pair. 

To reduce interference between nearby twisted pairs, the twist rates are different for each 

pair. 

Up to 25 twisted pair are put together in a protective covering to form twisted pair cables 

that are the backbone of telephone systems and Ethernet networks. 

Advantages of twisted pair cable 

66 

 
 
 
Twisted pair cable are the oldest and most popular cables all over the world. This is due 

to the many advantages that they offer  

o  Trained personnel easily available due to shallow learning curve 

o  Can be used for both analog and digital transmissions 

o  Least expensive for short distances 

o  Entire network does not go down if a part of network is damaged 

  Disadvantages of twisted pair cable 

With its many advantages, twisted pair cables offer some disadvantages too  

o  Signal cannot travel long distances without repeaters 

o  High error rate for distances greater than 100m 

o  Very thin and hence breaks easily 

o  Not suitable for broadband connections 

  Shielding twisted pair cable 

To counter the tendency of twisted pair cables to pick up noise signals, wires are shielded 

in the following three ways  

o  Each twisted pair is shielded. 

o  Set of multiple twisted pairs in the cable is shielded. 

o  Each twisted pair and then all the pairs are shielded. 

Such twisted pairs are called shielded twisted pair (STP) cables. The wires that are not 

shielded but simply bundled together in a protective sheath are called unshielded twisted 

pair  (UTP)  cables.  These  cables  can  have  maximum  length  of  100  metres.Shielding 

makes the cable bulky, so UTP are more popular than STP. UTP cables are used as the 

last mile network connection in homes and offices. 

  Coaxial Cable 

Coaxial cables are copper cables with better shielding than twisted pair cables, so that 

transmitted signals may travel longer distances at higher speeds. A coaxial cable consists 

of these layers, starting from the innermost  

o  Stiff copper wire as core 

o 

Insulating material surrounding the core 

o  Closely woven braided mesh of conducting material surrounding the insulator 

o  Protective plastic sheath encasing the wire 

Coaxial cables are widely used for cable TV connections and LANs. 

67 

 
  Advantages of Coaxial Cables 

These are the advantages of coaxial cables  

o  Excellent noise immunity 

o  Signals can travel longer distances at higher speeds, e.g. 1 to 2 Gbps for 1 Km 

cable 

o  Can be used for both analog and digital signals 

o 

Inexpensive as compared to fibre optic cables 

o  Easy to install and maintain 

  Disadvantages of Coaxial Cables 

These are some of the disadvantages of coaxial cables  

o  Expensive as compared to twisted pair cables 

o  Not compatible with twisted pair cables 

  Optical Fibre 

Thin glass or plastic threads used to transmit data using light waves are called optical 

fibre.  Light  Emitting  Diodes  (LEDs)  or  Laser  Diodes  (LDs)  emit  light  waves  at 

the source, which is read by a detector at the other end. Optical fibre cable has a bundle 

of such threads or fibres bundled together in a protective covering. Each fibre is made 

up of these three layers, starting with the innermost layer  

o  Core made of high quality silica glass or plastic 

68 

 
 
 
o  Cladding made of high quality silica glass or plastic, with a lower refractive index 

than the core 

o  Protective outer covering called buffer 

Note that both core and cladding are made of similar material. However, as refractive 

index of  the  cladding  is  lower,  any  stray  light  wave  trying  to  escape  the  core  is 

reflected back due to total internal reflection. 

Optical  fibre 

is  rapidly  replacing  copper  wires 

in 

telephone 

lines, 

internet 

communication and even cable TV connections because transmitted data can travel very 

long  distances  without  weakening. Single  node fibre  optic  cable  can  have  maximum 

segment length of 2 kms and bandwidth of up to 100 Mbps. Multi-node fibre optic cable 

can have maximum segment length of 100 kms and bandwidth up to 2 Gbps. 

  Advantages of Optical Fibre 

Optical fibre is fast replacing copper wires because of these advantages that it offers  

o  High bandwidth 

o  Immune to electromagnetic interference 

o  Suitable for industrial and noisy areas 

o  Signals carrying data can travel long distances without weakening Disadvantages of 

Optical Fibre 

69 

 
 
Despite long segment lengths and high bandwidth, using optical fibre may not be a 

viable option for every one due to these disadvantages  

o  Optical fibre cables are expensive 

o  Sophisticated technology required for manufacturing, installing and maintaining 

optical fibre cables 

o  Light waves are unidirectional, so two frequencies are required for full duplex 

transmission 

  Infrared 

Low frequency infrared waves are used for very short distance communication like TV 

remote, wireless speakers, automatic doors, hand held devices etc. Infrared signals can 

propagate within a room but cannot penetrate walls. However, due to such short range, 

it is considered to be one of the most secure transmission modes. 

  Radio Wave 

Transmission of data using radio frequencies is called radio-wave transmission. We all 

are familiar with radio channels that broadcast entertainment programs. Radio stations 

transmit radio waves using transmitters, which are received by the receiver installed in 

our devices. 

Both transmitters and receivers use antennas to radiate or capture radio signals. These 

radio frequencies can also be used for direct voice communication within the allocated 

range. This range is usually 10 miles. 

70 

 
 
  Advantages of Radio Wave 

These are some of the advantages of radio wave transmissions  

o 

Inexpensive mode of information exchange 

o  No land needs to be acquired for laying cables 

o 

Installation and maintenance of devices is cheap 

  Disadvantages of Radio Wave 

These are some of the disadvantages of radio wave transmissions  

o 

Insecure communication medium 

o  Prone to weather changes like rain, thunderstorms, etc. 

4.7 SUMMARY 

Web Browser A software application used to access information on the World Wide Web is 

called a Web Browser. When a user requests some information, the web browser fetches 

the data from a web server and then displays the webpage on the user’s screen. ISP stands 

for Internet Service Provider which is a term used to refer to a company that provides 

internet access to people who pay the company or subscribe to the company for the 

same. Networking to be effective, raw stream of data is to be transported from one device 

to other over some medium. Various transmission media can be used for transfer of data 

through guided and unguided media. 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.8 KEYWORDS 

              Web Browser 

               ISP 

               WWW 

               URL 

               Guided 

               Unguided 

4.9 QUESTION FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  What is web browser? explain its applications with an example. 

2.  What is ISP? Explain its advantages and disadvantages. 

3.  Explain WWW with an example. 

4.  What is URL and its Applications? explain 

5.   Explain Broad band transmission. 

6.  Explain with an example Guided Media – Twisted Pair Cable, Coaxial Cable, 

Fiber-Optic Cable. 

4.10  REFERENCES 

1.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan, 4th   Edition, Tata 

McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

2.  Communication Networks: Fundamental Concepts and Key Architectures - Alberto 

Leon, Garcia and Indra Widjaja, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw- Hill, 2004.  

3.  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

72 

 
 
           
 
 
 
 
UNIT 5: UNGUIDED TRANSMISSION MEDIA 

Structure 

5.0  Objectives 

5.1 Introduction 

5.2  Unguided Media-Wireless, radio waves, microwaves, infrared and Satellite  

 Communication System  

5.3  Summary 

5.4  Keywords 

5.5  Questions for Self Study  

5.6 Suggested readings and References 

5.0 OBJECTIVES 

At the end of this unit you will be able to 

  Analyze  Transmission  Media-Unguided  Media-Wireless, 

radio  waves, 

microwaves, infrared and Satellite Communication System.   

5.1 INTRODUCTION 

 

In  this  unit  we  study  about  the  Transmission  Media-  Unguided  Media-

Wireless,  radio  waves,  microwaves,  infrared  and  Satellite  Communication 

System.   

. 
I  
5.2  UNGUIDED  MEDIA-WIRELESS,  RADIO  WAVES,  MICROWAVES, 

INFRARED 

Unguided media transport electromagnetic waves without using a physical conductor. 

This  type of communication is  often referred to  as  wireless communication. Signals 

are normally broadcast through free space and thus are available to anyone who has a 

device  capable  of  receiving  them.  Unguided  signals  can  travel  from  the  source  to 

destination  in  several  ways:  ground  propagation,  sky  propagation,  and  line-of-sight 

propagation.In ground propagation, radio waves travel through the lowest portion of 

the  atmosphere,  hugging  the  earth.  These  low-frequency  signals  emanate  in  all 

directions 

73 

 
 
 
 
from  the  transmitting  antenna  and  follow  the  curvature  of  the  planet.  Distance 

depends on the amount of power in the signal: The greater the power, the greater the 

distance.In  sky  propagation,  higher-frequency  radio  waves  radiate  upward  into  the 

ionosphere  (the  layer  of  atmosphere  where  particles  exist  as  ions)  where  they  are 

reflected  back  to  earth.  This  type  of  transmission  allows  for  greater  distances  with 

lower  output  power.  In  line-or-sight  propagation,  very  high-frequency  signals  are 

transmitted  in  straight  lines  directly  from  antenna  to  antenna.  Antennas  must  be 

directional, facing each other, and either tall enough or close enough together not to 

be affected by the curvature of the earth. Line-of-sight propagation is tricky because 

radio transmissions cannot be completely focused. The section of the electromagnetic 

spectrum defined as radio waves and microwaves is divided into eight ranges, called 

bands, each regulated by government authorities. These bands are rated from very low 

frequency  (VLF)  to  extremely  high  frequency  (EHF).We  can  divide  wireless 

transmission into three broad groups: radio waves, micro- waves, and infrared waves. 

  Radio Waves 

Although  there  is  no  clear-cut  demarcation  between  radio  waves  and  microwaves, 

electromagnetic waves ranging in frequencies between 3 kHz and 1 GHz are normally 

called radio waves; waves ranging in frequencies between 1 and 300 GHz are called 

microwaves.  Radio  waves  are  omnidirectional.  When  an  antenna  transmits  radio 

waves,  they  are  propagated  in  all  directions.  This  means  that  the  sending  and 

receiving antennas do not have to be aligned. A sending antenna sends waves that can 

be  received  by  any  receiving  antenna.  The  omnidirectional  property  has  a 

disadvantage,  too.  The  radio  waves  transmitted  by  one  antenna  are  susceptible  to 

interference  by  another  antenna  that  may  send  signals  using  the  same  frequency  or 

band.  Radio  waves,  particularly  those  waves  that  propagate  in  the  sky  mode,  can 

travel  long  distances.  This  makes  radio  waves  a  good  candidate  for  long-distance 

broadcasting  such  as  AM  radio.Radio  waves,  particularly  those  of  low  and  medium 

frequencies,  can penetrate walls.  This characteristic can be both an  advantage and a 

disadvantage.  It  is  an  advantage  because,  for  example,  an  AM  radio  can  receive 

signals  inside  a  building.  It  is  a  disadvantage  because  we  cannot  isolate  a 

communication to just inside or outside a building. The radio wave band is relatively 

narrow, just under 1 GHz, compared to the microwave band.  

74 

 
 
  Microwaves 

Electromagnetic  waves  having  frequencies  between  I  and  300  GHz  are  called 

microwaves.  Microwaves  are  unidirectional.  When  an  antenna  transmits  microwave 

waves,  they  can  be  narrowly  focused.  This  means  that  the  sending  and  receiving 

antennas need to be aligned. The unidirectional property has an obvious advantage. A 

pair  of  antennas  can  be  aligned  without  interfering  with  another  pair  of  aligned 

antennas. The following describes some characteristics of microwave propagation: 

 Microwave propagation is line-of-sight. Since the towers with the mounted antennas 

need to be in direct sight of each other, towers that are far apart need to be very tall. 

  Very high-frequency microwaves cannot penetrate walls. This characteristic can be 

a disadvantage if receivers are inside buildings. 

  The  microwave  band  is  relatively  wide,  almost  299  GHz.  Therefore,  wider 

subbands can be assigned, and a high data rate is possible 

  Use  of  certain  portions  of  the  band  requires  permission  from  authorities. 

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Infrared 

Infrared waves, with frequencies from 300 GHz to 400 THz (wavelengths from 1 mm 

to 770 nm), can be used for short-range communication. Infrared waves, having high 

frequencies,  cannot  penetrate  walls.  This  advantageous  characteristic  prevents 

interference between one system and another; a short-range communication system in 

one room cannot be affected by another system in the next room. When we use our 

infrared  remote  control,  we  do  not  interfere  with  the  use  of  the  remote  by  our 

neighbors. However, this same characteristic makes infrared signals useless for long-

range  communication.  In  addition,  we  cannot  use  infrared  waves  outside  a  building 

because  the  sun's  rays  contain  infrared  waves  that  can  interfere  with  the 

communication. 

  Satellite communications are comprised of 2 main components: 

The  satellite  itself  is  also  known  as  the  space  segment,  and  is  composed  of  three 

separate  units,  namely  the  fuel  system,  the  satellite  and  telemetry  controls,  and  the 

transponder. The transponder includes the receiving antenna to pick-up signals  from 

the  ground  station,  a  broad  band  receiver,  an  input  multiplexer,  and  a  frequency 

converter  which  is  used  to  reroute  the  received  signals  through  a  high  powered 

amplifier for downlink. The primary role of a satellite is to reflect electronic signals. 

In the case of a telecom satellite, the primary task is to receive signals from a ground 

station and send them down to another ground station located a considerable distance 

away from the first. This relay action can be two-way, as in the case of a long distance 

phone  call.  Another  use  of  the  satellite  is  when,  as  is  the  case  with  television 

broadcasts, the ground station's uplink is then down linked over a wide region, so that 

it  may  be  received  by  many  different  customers  possessing  compatible  equipment. 

Still  another  use  for  satellites  is  observation,  wherein  the  satellite  is  equipped  with 

cameras or various sensors, and it merely downlinks any information it picks up from 

its vantage point. 

  The Ground Station. 

This  is  the  earth  segment.  The  ground  station's  job  is  two-fold.  In  the  case  of  an 

uplink,  or  transmitting  station,  terrestrial  data  in  the  form  of  baseband  signals,  is 

passed through a baseband processor, an up converter, a high powered amplifier, and 

through a parabolic dish antenna up to an orbiting satellite. In the case of a downlink, 

76 

 
 
 
or receiving station, works in the reverse fashion as the uplink, ultimately converting 

signals received through the parabolic antenna to base band signal. Communications 

satellite is station in the space that receives microwaves signals from an earth-based 

station,  amplifies  the  signals,  and  broadcasts  the  signals  back  over  a  wide  area  to 

many earth-based stations. Communications satellites are usually placed about 22,300 

miles above the Earth's equator and moves at the same rate as the Earth.  Applications 

of 

communications 

satellite 

include 

television 

and 

radio 

broadcasts, 

videoconferencing, paging, and global positioning systems. 

  Advantages of satellites 

Lots of data can be sent simultaneously. 

Allow high quality broadband communication across continents. 

  Disadvantages of satellites 

The fee to launch a satellite is extremely expensively. 

The infrastructure needed to access satellite communications is also expensive. 

5.3 SUMMARY 

In  this  unit,  we  discussed  about  the  Analyze  Transmission  Media-guided  media, 

twisted-pair  cable,  coaxial  cable,  fiber  optic  cable.  Also  studied  Unguided  Media-

Wireless, radio waves, microwaves, infrared. 

5.4 KEYWORDS  

Guided, Unguided, Infrared, Radio waves, micro waves 

5.5 QUESTIONS FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  What are the different wireless transmissions medium? 

2.  Which  transmission  media  would  have  greater  start-up  cost,  hardwiring  or 

wireless transmission media? 

3.  Explain  different  types  of  wireless  transmission  media?  in  detail  and  also 

compare them 

4.  Write a note on Unguided Media-Wireless, radio waves, microwaves, infrared 

and Satellite. 

5.6 Reference 

1.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan, 4th   Edition, 

Tata McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Communication  Networks:  Fundamental  Concepts  and  Key  Architectures  - 
Alberto  Leon,  Garcia  and  Indra  Widjaja,  3rd  Edition,  Tata  McGraw-  Hill, 
2004.  

3.  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

78 

 
 
 
UNIT -6: NETWORK MODELS 

Structure 

6.0  Objectives  

6.1   Introduction 

6.2  The OSI model 

6.3  Layers in the OSI model  

6.4    Check your progress 

6.5     Summary 

6.6      Keywords  

6.7    Questions for self-study 

6.8    References 

6.0 OBJECTIVES 

After studying this unit, you will be able to  

  Explain the layered architecture of the OSI model. 

  Describe the peer to peer processes. 

  Learn the concept of encapsulation 

  Differentiate the roles and functions of the layers in the OSI model. 

6.1 INTRODUCTION 

A  network  is  a  combination  of  hardware  and  software  that  sends  data  from  one 

location  to  another.  The  hardware  consists  of  the  physical  equipment  that  carries 

signals from one point of the network to another. The software consists of instruction 

sets that make possible the services that we expect from a network. 

The  layered  model  that  dominated  data  communications  and  networking 

literature before 1990 was the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model. Everyone 

believed  that  the  OSI  model  would  become  the  ultimate  standard  for  data 

communications,  but  this  did  not  happen.  The  TCP/IP  protocol  suite  became  the 

dominant  commercial  architecture  because  it  was  used  and  tested  extensively  in  the 

Internet;  the  OSI  model  was  never  fully  implemented.  In  this  unit,  we  give  the 

overview of the OSI model and the layers in it; discuss the functions of each layer.  

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6.2 THE OSI MODEL 

The  OSI  model  is  based  on  a  proposal  developed  by  the  International  Standards 

Organization (ISO) as a first step toward international standardization of the protocols 

used  in  the  various  layers.  The  model  is  called  the  ISO  OSI  (Open  Systems 

Interconnection)  Reference  Model  because  it  deals  with  connecting  open  systems. 

An  open  system  is  a  set  of  protocols  that  allows  any  two  different  systems  to 

communicate  regardless  of  their  underlying  architecture.  The  OSI  model  is  not  a 

protocol; it is a model for understanding and designing a network architecture that is 

flexible, robust, and interoperable. 

6.2.1 Layered Architecture: 

The OSI model is a layered framework for the design of network systems that allow 

communication between all types of computer systems. It  consists of seven separate 

but  related  layers;  they  are  -  Physical,  Data  link,  Network,  Transport,  Session, 

Presentation, and Application.  The layers are ordered as shown in the figure. 

Layer 7: Application 

Layer 6: Presentation 

Layer 5: Session 

Layer 4: Transport 

Layer 3: Network 

Layer 2: Data link 

Layer 1: Physical 

Figure 6.1: Layers of the OSI model 

Figure 6.1 shows the layers involved when a message is sent from device A to device 

B. As the message travels from A to B, it may pass through many intermediate nodes. 

These intermediate nodes usually involve only the first three layers of the OSI model.  

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.2: Interaction between layers in OSI model 

In developing the model, the related functions were collected into discrete groups that 

became the layers. Each layer defines a family of functions distinct from those of the 

other layers. Thus the layered architecture is both comprehensive and flexible. Within 

a single machine, each layer calls upon the services of the layer just below it. Between 

machines,  layer  x  on  one  machine  communicates  with  layer  x  on  another  machine. 

This  communication  is  governed  by  an  agreed-upon  set  of  rules  and  conventions 

called  protocols.  The  processes  on  each  machine  that  communicate  at  a  given  layer 

are  called  peer-to-peer  processes.  Communication  between  machines  is  therefore  a 

peer-to-peer process using the protocols appropriate to a given layer. 

6.2.2 Peer-to-Peer Processes: 

At  the  physical  layer,  communication  is  direct:  In  Figure  6.2.2,  device  A  sends  a 

stream  of  bits  to  device  B  (through  intermediate  nodes).  At  the  higher  layers, 

however,  communication  must  move  down  through  the  layers  on  device  A,  over  to 

device B, and then back up through the layers. Each layer in the sending device adds 

its own information to the message it receives from the layer just above it and passes 

the whole package to the layer just below it. 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
At  layer  1  the  entire  package  is  converted  to  a  form  that  can  be  transmitted  to  the 

receiving device. At the receiving machine, the message is unwrapped layer by layer, 

with each process receiving and removing the data meant for it. For example, layer 2 

removes  the  data  meant  for  it,  and  then  passes  the  rest  to  layer  3.  Layer  3  then 

removes the data meant for it and passes the rest to layer 4, and so on. 

  Interfaces between Layers: 

The  passing  of  the  data  and  network  information  down  through  the  layers  of  the 

sending  device  and  back  up  through  the  layers  of  the  receiving  device  is  made 

possible by an interface between each pair of adjacent layers. Each interface defines 

the information and services, a layer must provide for the layer above it. Well-defined 

interfaces  and  layer  functions  provide  modularity  to  a  network.  As  long  as  a  layer 

provides the expected services to the layer above it, the specific implementation of its 

functions  can  be  modified  or  replaced  without  requiring  changes  to  the  surrounding 

layers. 

  Organization of the Layers: 

The seven layers can be thought of as belonging to three subgroups. Layers 1, 2, and 

3-physical, data link, and network-are the network support layers; they deal with the 

physical  aspects  of  moving  data  from  one  device  to  another  such  as  electrical 

specifications,  physical  connections,  physical  addressing,  and  transport  timing  and 

reliability. Layers 5, 6, and 7-session, presentation, and application-can be thought of 

as  the  user  support  layers;  they  allow  interoperability  among  unrelated  software 

systems.  Layer  4,  the  transport  layer,  links  the  two  subgroups  and  ensures  that  the 

data the lower layers have transmitted is in a form that the upper layers can use. 

The  upper  OSI  layers  are  almost  always  implemented  in  software;  lower 

layers  are  a  combination  of  hardware  and  software,  except  for  the  physical  layer, 

which is mostly hardware. 

Figure 6.3, gives an overall view of the OSI layers. The process starts at layer 

7  (the  application  layer),  then  moves  from  layer  to  layer  in  descending,  sequential 

order.  At  each  layer,  a  header,  or  possibly  a  trailer,  can  be  added  to  the  data  unit. 

Commonly, the trailer is added only at layer 2. When the formatted data unit passes 

through the physical layer (layer 1), it is changed into an electromagnetic signal and 

transported along a physical link. 

82 

 
 
. 

Figure 6.3: Exchange using the OSI model 

Upon reaching its destination, the signal passes into layer 1 and is transformed 

back into digital form. The data units then move back up through the OSI layers. As 

each block of data reaches the next higher layer, the headers and trailers attached to it 

at the corresponding sending layer are removed, and actions appropriate to that layer 

are taken. By the time it reaches layer 7, the message is again in a form appropriate to 

the application and is made available to the recipient. 

6.2.3 Encapsulation: 

Encapsulation is another aspect of data communications in the OSI model as revealed 

in  Figure  6.3.  A  packet  containing  header  and  data  at  level  7  is  encapsulated  in  a 

packet at level 6. The whole packet at level 6 is encapsulated in a packet at level 5, 

and so on. In other words, the data portion of a packet at level N - 1 carries the whole 

packet containing data, header and (maybe) trailer from level N. The concept is called 

encapsulation. The level N - 1 is not aware of which part of the encapsulated packet is 

data and which part is the header or trailer. For level N - 1, the whole packet coming 

from level N is treated as one integral unit. 

83 

 
 
 
 
6.3 LAYERS IN THE OSI MODEL 

In this section we briefly describe the functions of each layer in the OSI model. 

6.3.1 Physical Layer: 

The  physical  layer  is  the  lowest  layer  of  the  OSI  model,  concerned  with  the 

transmission and reception of the unstructured raw bit stream over a physical medium. 

It  describes  the  electrical,  optical,  mechanical,  and  functional  interfaces  to  the 

physical medium, and carries the signals for all of the higher layers.  

The physical layer is concerned with the following: 

1.  Defining  the  characteristics  of  the  interface  between  the  devices  and  the 

transmission medium. It also defines the type of transmission medium. 

2.  To transmit  a stream  of  bits which is  a sequence of 0s and 1s, must be encoded 

into signals--electrical or optical. The physical layer defines the type of encoding. 

3.  The physical layer defines the duration of a bit, which is how long it lasts. 

4.  The  sender  and  receiver  not  only  must  use  the  same  bit  rate  but  also  must  be 

synchronized at the bit level. 

5.  The physical layer is concerned with the connection of devices to the media. 

6.  The various physical topologies that devices are connected to make a network. 

7.  Defining the direction of transmission between two devices: simplex, half-duplex, 

or full-duplex. 

6.3.2 Data Link Layer: 

The data link layer provides error-free transfer of data frames from one node to 

another over the physical layer, allowing layers above it to assume virtually error-free 

transmission over the link.   

The responsibilities of the data link layer include the following: 

1.  Divides  the  stream  of  bits  received  from  the  network  layer  into  manageable 

data units called frames. 

2.  Adding a header to the frame to define the sender and receiver of the frame, if 

the frame is to be distributed to different systems on the network.  

3.  To impose a flow control  mechanism to  avoid  overwhelming the  receiver, if 

the data receiving rate at the receiver is less than the data production rate at the 

sender. 

4.  It  is  responsible  for  the  detection  and  retransmission  of  damaged  or  lost 

frames, to recognize duplicate frames. Thus controls the error in transmission. 

84 

 
 
5.  When  two  or  more  devices  are  connected  to  the  same  link,  data  link  layer 

protocols are necessary to determine which device has control over the link at 

any  given  time. 

6.3.3 Network Layer: 

The  network  layer  is  responsible  for  the  delivery  of  a  packet  from  source-to-

destination,  possibly  across  multiple  networks.  A  need  for  the  network  layer  to 

accomplish  source-to-destination  delivery  arises  whenever  the  two  systems  are 

attached to different networks.  

The responsibilities of the network layer include the following: 

1.  The physical addressing is implemented by the data link layer that addresses 

the  problem  locally.  To  distinguish  the  source  and  destination  systems,  the 

network layer adds the logical addresses of the sender and receiver.  

2.  Responsible for the mechanism of routing the packets to their final destination. 

3.  Has  accounting  functions  to  keep  track  of  frames  forwarded  by  subnet 

intermediate systems, to produce billing information. 

4.  Routers can instruct a sending station to "throttle back" its frame transmission 

when the router's buffer fills up. 

5.  If it determines that a downstream router's maximum transmission unit (MTU) 

size is less than the frame size, a router can fragment a frame for transmission 

and re-assemble at the destination station. 

6.3.4 Transport Layer: 

The  transport  layer  ensures  that  messages  are  delivered  error-free,  in  sequence,  and 

with no losses or duplications. It relieves the higher layer protocols from any concern 

with the transfer of data between them and their peers. The size and complexity of a 

transport  protocol  depends  on  the  type  of  service  it  can  get  from  the  network  layer. 

For a reliable network layer with virtual circuit capability, a minimal transport layer is 

required.  If  the  network  layer  is  unreliable  and/or  only  supports  datagram,  the 

transport  protocol  should 

include  extensive  error  detection  and 

recovery.  

The transport layer provides: 

1.  Service point addressing: Source-to-destination delivery means delivery from 

a  specific  process  (running  program)  on  one  computer  to  a  specific  process 

(running program) on the other. So the transport layer header includes a type 

85 

 
 
 
of address called a service-point address (or port address). The network layer 

gets  each  packet  to  the  correct  computer;  the  transport  layer  gets  the  entire 

message to the correct process on that computer. 

2.  Message  segmentation:  Accepts  a  message  from  the  session  layer,  splits  the 

message into smaller units, and passes the smaller units down to the network 

layer. The transport layer at the destination station reassembles the message. 

3.  Message  acknowledgment:  Provides  reliable  end-to-end  message  delivery 

with acknowledgments. 

4.  Flow control: The transport layer is responsible for end to end flow control.  

5.  Error  control.  Like  the  data  link  layer,  the  transport  layer  is  responsible  for 

error  control.  However,  error  control  at  this  layer  is  performed  process-to 

process  rather  than  across  a  single  link.  The  sending  transport  layer  makes 

sure  that  the  entire  message  arrives  at  the  receiving  transport  layer  without 

error  (damage,  loss,  or  duplication).  Error  correction  is  usually  achieved 

through retransmission. 

6.3.5 Session Layer: 

The services provided by the first three layers are not sufficient  for some processes. 

The  session  layer  is  the  network  dialog  controller.  It  establishes,  maintains,  and 

synchronizes the interaction among different communicating systems. 

Specific responsibilities of the session layer include the following: 

1.  Dialog control. The session layer allows two systems to enter into a dialog. It 

allows the communication between two processes to take place in either half 

duplex or full-duplex mode. 

2.  Synchronization.  The  session  layer  allows  a  process  to  add  checkpoints,  or 

synchronization points, to a stream of data.  

6.3.6 Presentation Layer: 

The presentation layer formats the data to be presented to the application layer. It can 

be  viewed  as  the  translator  for  the  network.  This  layer  may  translate  data  from  a 

format used by the application layer into a common format at the sending station, then 

translate  the  common  format  to  a  format  known  to  the  application  layer  at  the 

receiving station.  

The responsibilities of the presentation layer include:  

86 

 
 
 
 
Translation:  The  presentation  layer  at  the  sender  changes  the  information  from  its 

sender-dependent  format  into  a  common  format.  The  presentation  layer  at  the 

receiving machine changes the common format into its receiver-dependent format. 

Encryption: The layer transforms the original message to another form and sends the 

resulting message out over the network.  Decryption reverses the original process to 

transform  the  message  back  to  its  original  form.Compression:  Data  compression 

becomes particularly important in the transmission of multimedia such as text, audio, 

and video. The layer compresses the data before transmission. 

6.3.7 Application Layer: 

The  application  layer  serves  as  the  window  for  users  and  application  processes  to 

access network services. This layer contains a variety of commonly needed functions 

such as electronic mail, remote file access and transfer, shared database management, 

and other types of distributed information services. 

Specific services provided by the application layer include the following: 

1.  Network virtual terminal. A network virtual terminal is a software version of a 

physical terminal, and it allows a user to log on to a remote host. The remote 

host believes it is communicating with one of its own terminals and allows the 

user to log on. 

2.  File transfer, access, and management. This application allows a user to access 

files in a remote host, to retrieve files from a remote computer for use in the 

local computer, and to manage or control files in a remote computer locally. 

3.  Mail  services.  This  application  provides  the  basis  for  e-mail  forwarding  and 

storage. 

4.  Directory services. This application provides distributed database sources and 

access 

for  global 

information  about  various  objects  and  services. 

6.4 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 

1.  How many layers are there in the OSI model? 

2.  Which layer is responsible for converting data into electrical signals? 

3.  The  layer  which  establishes,  maintains,  and  terminates  communications 

between applications located on different devices is ____________ 

87 

 
 
 
 
4.  _______layer is responsible for the routing  of the data packets  from the 

source to destination. 

5.  Which  layer  defines  how  data  is  formatted,  presented,  encoded,  and 

converted for use on the network? 

6.  The ___________ layer links the network support layers and the user support 

layers. 

7.  The application layer is a ___________ support layer. 

8.  The data link layer is a __________ support layer. 

9.  Interface  defines  the  _______and  ______  a  layer  must  provide  for  the  layer 

above it. 

Answers:   

1.  Seven 

2.  Physical layer 

3.  Session 

4.  Network 

5.  Presentation layer  

6.  Transport   

7.  User 

8.  Network 

9.  Information, services 

6.5 SUMMARY 

The OSI model is based on a proposal developed by the ISO for the standardization of 

the protocols. The OSI model provides guidelines for the development of universally 

compatible networking protocols. The model has seven layers. The upper layers (5-7) 

of the OSI model deal with application issues and generally are implemented only in 

software.  The  highest  layer,  the  application  layer,  is  closest  to  the  end-user.  Both 

users and application layer processes interact with software applications that contain a 

communications  component.  The  lower  layers  (1-4)  of  the  OSI  model  handle  data 

transport  issues.  The  physical  layer  and  the  data  link  layer  are  implemented  in 

hardware and software. The lowest layer, the physical layer, is closest to the physical 

network medium and is responsible for actually placing information on the medium. 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.6 KEYWORDS 

Layer,  protocol,  interface,  OSI  model  -  physical,  data  link,  network,  transport, 

session, presentation, and application layers. 

6.7 QUESTIONS FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  Which layers in the OSI model are the network support layers? 

2.  Which layer in the OSI model is the user support layer? 

3.  What  is  the  difference  between  network  layer  delivery  and  transport  layer 

delivery? 

4.  What is a peer-to-peer process? 

5.  How does information get passed from one layer to the next in the OSI model? 

6.  What are headers and trailers, and how do they get added and removed? 

6.  What are the concerns of the physical layer in the OSI model? 

7.  What are the responsibilities of the data link layer in the OSI model? 

8.  What are the responsibilities of the network layer in the OSI model? 

9.  What are the responsibilities of the transport layer in the OSI model? 

10. What  is  the  difference  between  a  port  address,  a  logical  address,  and  a 

physical address? 

11. Name some services provided by the application layer in the OSI model. 

6.8 REFERENCES 

1.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan, 4th   Edition, 

Tata McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

2.  Communication  Networks:  Fundamental  Concepts  and  Key  Architectures  - 
Alberto  Leon,  Garcia  and  Indra  Widjaja,  3rd  Edition,  Tata  McGraw-  Hill, 
2004.  

3.  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 7: CONNECTING DEVICES (Networking Devices) 

Structure: 

7.0  Objectives 

7.1 

Introduction 

7.2  Connecting devices 

7.3  Passive Hubs and active hubs 

7.4  Bridges 

7.5  Two layer switches 

7.6  Gateway 

7.7  Summary 

7.8 

 Keywords 

7.9 

  Questions 

7.10 References 

7.0 OBJECTIVES 

After studying this unit, you will be able to 

  Name the connecting devices used in a network 

  Explain router 

  Describe the functions of bridges, gateway 

7.1 INTRODUCTION 

LANs do not normally operate in isolation. They are connected to one another or to 

the  Internet.  To  connect  LANs,  or  segments  of  LANs,  we  use  connecting  devices. 

Connecting  devices  can  operate  in  different  layers  of  the  Internet  model.  Here,  we 

discuss only those that operate in the physical and data link layers. 

7.2 CONNECTING DEVICES 

we  divide  connecting  devices  into  five  different  categories  based  on  the  layer  in 

which they operate in a network 

The five categories contain devices which can be defined as 

1. Those which operate below the physical layer such as a passive hub. 

2. Those which operate at the physical layer (a repeater or an active hub). 

3. Those which operate at the physical and data link layers (a bridge or a two-layer 

switch). 

4. Those which operate at the physical, data link, and network layers (a router or a 

90 

 
 
 
three-layer switch). 

5. Those which can operate at all five layers (a gateway). 

7.3 PASSIVE HUBS 

A  passive  hub  is  just  a  connector.  It  connects  the  wires  coming  from  different 

branches.  In  a  star-topology  Ethernet  LAN,  a  passive  hub  is  just  a  point  where  the 

signals coming from different stations collide; the hub is the collision point. This type 

of a hub is part of the media; its location in the Internet model is below the physical 

layer.  

  Repeaters 

A  repeater  is  a  device  that  operates  only  in  the  physical  layer.  Signals  that  carry  

information within a network can travel a fixed distance before attenuation endangers  

the integrity of the data. A repeater receives a signal and, before it becomes too weak 

or corrupted, regenerates the original bit pattern. The repeater then sends the refreshed 

signal. A repeater can extend the physical length of a LAN, as shown in Figure . 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
A repeater does not actually connect two LANs; it connects two segments of the same 

LAN.  The  segments  connected  are  still  part  of  one  single  LAN.  A  repeater  is  not  a 

device that can connect two LANs of different protocols. The location of a repeater on 

a link is vital. A repeater must be placed so that a signal reaches it before any noise 

changes the meaning of any of its bits. A little noise can alter the precision of a bit's 

voltage  without  destroying  its  identity  (see  Figure  15.3).  If  the  corrupted  bit  travels 

much farther, however, accumulated noise can change its meaning completely. At that 

point, the original voltage is  not  recoverable, and the error needs to  be corrected. A 

repeater  placed  on  the  line  before  the  legibility  of  the  signal  becomes  lost  can  still 

read the signal well enough to determine the intended voltages and replicate them in 

their original form. 

. 

  ACTIVE HUBS 

An  active  hub  is  actually  a  multipart  repeater.  It  is  normally  used  to  create 

connections between stations in a physical star topology. We have seen examples of 

hubs in some Ethernet implementations (lOBase-T, for example). However, hubs can 

also  be  used  to  create  multiple  levels  of  hierarchy,  as  shown  in  Figure  15.4.  The 

hierarchical use of hubs removes the length limitation of 10Base-T (100 m). 

92 

 
 
 
 
 
 
7.4 BRIDGES 

A  bridge  operates  in  both  the  physical  and  the  data  link  layer.  As  a  physical  layer 

device, it regenerates the signal it receives. As a data link layer device, the bridge can 

check the physical (MAC) addresses (source and destination) contained in the frame. 

Filtering 

One may ask, What is the difference in functionality between a bridge and a repeater? 

A bridge has filtering capability. It can check the destination address of a frame and 

decide if the frame should be forwarded or dropped. If the frame is to be forwarded,  

the decision must specify the port. A bridge has a table that maps addresses to ports. 

A bridge has a table used in filtering decisions. Let us give an example. In Figure, two 

LANs  are  connected  by  a  bridge.  If  a  frame  destined  for  station  712B13456142 

arrives at port 1, the bridge consults its table to find the departing port. According to 

its  table,  frames  for  7l2B13456142  leave  through  port  1;  therefore,  there  is  no  need 

for  forwarding,  and  the  frame  is  dropped.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  frame  for 

712B13456141 arrives at port 2, the departing port is port 1  

93 

 
 
 
 
and  the  frame  is  forwarded.  In  the  first  case,  LAN  2  remains  free  of  traffic;  in  the 

second case, both LANs have traffic. In our example, we show a two-port bridge; in 

reality a bridge usually has more ports. 

Note also that a bridge does not change the physical addresses contained in the frame. 

7.5 TWO-LAYER SWITCHES 

When  we  use  the  term  switch,  we  must  be  careful  because  a  switch  can  mean  two 

different  things.  We  must  clarify  the  term  by  adding  the  level  at  which  the  device 

operates.We  can  have  a  two-layer  switch  or  a  three-layer  switch.  A  three-layer 

switch  is  used  at  the  network  layer;  it  is  a  kind  of  router.  The  two-layer  switch 

performs at the physical and data link layers. A two-layer switch is a bridge, a bridge 

with many ports and a design that allows better (faster) performance. A bridge with a 

few ports can connect a few LANs together. A bridge with many ports may be able to 

allocate a unique port to each station, with each station on its own independent entity. 

This  means  no  competing  traffic  (no  collision,  as  we  saw  in  Ethernet).  A  two-layer 

switch, as a bridge does, makes a filtering decision based on the MAC address of the 

frame it received. However, a two-layer switch can be more sophisticated. It can have 

a buffer to hold the frames for processing. It can have a switching factor that forwards 

the  frames  faster.  Some  new  two-layer  switches,  called  cut-through  switches,  have 

94 

 
 
 
 
 
been designed to forward the frame as soon as they check the MAC addresses in the 

header of the frame. 

  ROUTERS 

A  router  is  a  three-layer  device  that  routes  packets  based  on  their  logical  addresses 

(host-to-host  addressing).  A  router  normally  connects  LANs  and  WANs  in  the 

Internet and has a routing table that is used for making decisions about the route. The 

routing  tables  are  normally  dynamic  and  are  updated  using  routing  protocols.  We 

discuss  routers  and  routing  in  greater  detail  in  Chapters  19  and  21.  Figure  15.11 

shows a part of the Internet that uses routers to connect LANs and WANs. 

  THREE-LAYER SWITCHES 

A  three-layer  switch  is  a  router,  but  a  faster  and  more  sophisticated.  The  switching 

fabric in a three-layer switch allows faster table lookup and forwarding. In this book, 

we use the terms router and three-layer switch interchangeably. 

95 

 
 
 
 
 
7.6 GATEWAY 

Although some textbooks use the terms gateway and router interchangeably, most of 

the literature distinguishes between the two. A  gateway is  normally  a computer that 

operates  in  all  five  layers  of  the  Internet  or  seven  layers  of  OSI  model.  A  gateway 

takes an application message, reads it, and interprets it. This means that it can be used 

as  a  connecting  device  between  two  internetworks  that  use  different  models.  For 

example,  a  network  designed  to  use  the  OSI  model  can  be  connected  to  another 

network using the Internet model. The gateway connecting the two systems can take a 

frame as it arrives from the first system, move it up to the OSI application layer, and 

remove the message. 

7.7 SUMMARY 

In  this  unit,  we  study  about  the  connecting  devices  used  in  the  network  to  connect 

devices  within  the  network,  between  the  networks  of  same  type  and  between  the 

96 

 
 
 
 
 
networks of different type. 

7.8 KEYWORDS 

Router, Bridge, Switch, Hub, Gateway 

7.9 QUESTIONS 

1. Name the connecting devices used in the network. 

2. Distinguish between active and passive hub. 

3. What are the functions of repeater? 

4. Define router. 

5. What is a gateway? 

6. Write the functions of bridge. 

7.10  REFERENCES 

1.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan, 4th   Edition, Tata 

McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

2.  Communication  Networks:  Fundamental  Concepts  and  Key  Architectures  - 
Alberto Leon, Garcia and Indra Widjaja, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw- Hill, 2004.  
3.  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

97 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 8:   IP ADDRESSING AND PROTOCOLS 

Structure 

8.0     Objectives    

8.1     Introduction 

8.2     TCP, IP, UDP,IPV4,IPV6  

8.3     Summary/Let us Sum up 

8.4     Keywords 

8.5    Questions for Self Study 

8.6    Suggested readings and References 

8.0  OBJECTIVES 

At the end of this unit you will be able to understand:   

  TCP, IP, UDP, IPV4, IPV6.  

8.1 INTRODUCTION  

In this unit, we will study about the TCP, IP, UDP, IPV4, IPV6.  

8.2 TCP, IP, UDP, IPV4, IPV6.  

IP: Internet Protocol: 

IP  addresses  are  an  essential  part  of  computer  networking.  They  play  an  important 

role in sending and receiving information on the internet. Every device that connects 

to  an  internet  network  has  an  IP  address,  which  means  there  are  billions  of  IP 

addresses that exist. In this unit, we’re going to discuss IP addresses, how they work, 

static IP vs dynamic IP, and more. 

98 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  What is an IP address? 

An Internet Protocol address, or IP address, is a unique identifier assigned to every 

device on a TCP/IP network. The Internet Protocol is the set of rules that outlines how 

data  should  be  transported  across  the  internet  or  local  networks.  IP  addresses 

help identify devices and allow them to communicate with each other. Internally, IP 

addresses are stored as numbers. The Domain Name System (DNS) allows us to use 

words  to  identify  different  servers  on  the  internet,  such  as  an  application,  server,  or 

website.  When  we  type  a  URL  into  our  search  bar,  DNS  looks  up  that  domain’s  IP 

address  and  returns  it  to  our  network  device.  There  are  two  main  versions  of  IP 

addresses: IPv4 and IPv6. 

IP addresses are strings of four numbers separated by characters. For example, an IP 

address  could  look  like  this: 152.132.4.23.  They’re  produced  by  a  division  of  the 

Internet  Corporation  for  Assigned  Names  and  Numbers  to  help  make  the  internet 

more secure and accessible. We can think of IP addresses as physical home addresses. 

We  can  exchange  addresses  with  friends  and  family.  Those  addresses  give  us  a 

destination  that  allows  us  to  communicate  with  friends  and  family  through  different 

communication methods like birthday cards, letters, and more. 

  How does an IP address work? 

All  devices  communicate  with  one  another  using  the  Internet  Protocol  (IP).  Here’s 

how  it  works:Before  our  devices  connect  to  the  internet,  they connect  to  a 

network that’s connected to the internet. This network gives us access to the internet. 

For example, the network that we use at home will most likely be our Internet Service 

Provider (ISP). After this, our ISP will assign an IP address to our device. Our internet 

activity will go through the ISP and then be routed back to us using our assigned IP 

address. 

If we leave our home and take our personal device with us, our IP address from our 

home network doesn’t come with us. Let’s say we go to a hotel. When we want to use 

the internet  at the hotel,  we’d probably connect to their Wi-Fi network. Since we’re 

99 

 
 
using a new network, we’re temporarily assigned a new IP address. This temporary 

IP address is assigned to us by the hotel’s ISP. Can our IP addresses change? Yes, 

they can! If we turn our modem or router off, our IP address may change. We can also 

contact our ISP to change our IP address. This is one of the reasons why DNS is so 

important. Instead of directly informing others when our IP address changes, we can 

directly  inform  our  DNS  server.  This  means  that  any  other  device  that  contacts  the 

DNS server will get the updated information for the new IP address. 

  Static IP addresses: 

A  static  IP  address  is  explicitly  allocated  to  a  device  rather  than  one  that  a  DHCP 

server has assigned. Because it does not change, it is called static. 

Static  IP addresses can  be configured on routers, phones,  tablets,  desktops, laptops, 

and any other device that can use an IP address. This can be done either by the device 

itself handing out IP addresses or by manually typing the IP address into the device. 

If  you want  to  host  a website from  your home,  have a  file server on  your network, 

utilize  networked  printers,  forward  ports  to  a  specific  device,  run  a  print  server,  or 

use a remote access application, you'll need a static IP address. DNS servers are an 

example of a static IP address at work. 

  Static IP addresses 

Pros 

  Remote access: Static IP addresses make it easy for us to work remotely using 

a Virtual Private Network (VPN). 

  Server  hosting:  Static  IP  addresses  make  it  easy  for  people  to  find  us  using 

DNS. 

  DNS support: With static IP, it’s easier to manage DNS servers. 

  Geolocation  services:  With  static  IP  addresses,  our  geolocation  services  are 

more  accurate.  This  is  because  our  services  will  match  the  IP  address  to  its 

physical location. 

  Reliable connection: A static IP address is fixed, which typically results in a 

more reliable connection. 

100 

 
 
  Easy to find: A static IP address can make it easier to find specific devices on 

a network. 

Cons 

  Security concerns: With a static IP address, anyone with the proper tools can 

find where our devices are located. VPNs can help with this. 

  Cost:  Static  IP  addresses  are  not  as  cost-effective  as  dynamic  IP  addresses. 

Typically, ISPs charge more for them. 

  Dynamic IP addresses 

A dynamic IP address is an IP address that can regularly change. An ISP will buy a 

large  number  of  dynamic  IP  addresses  and  assign  them  to  their  customer’s  devices. 

Dynamic  IP  addresses  are  often  reassigned.  Reassigning  IP  addresses  helps  internet 

providers  save  money  and  ensure  a  higher  level  of security.  It  also  means  that  they 

don’t  need  to  take  the  time  to  reestablish  any  network  connections  if  we  go  on  a 

vacation  or  move  to  a  new  location.Dynamic  IP  addresses  are  more  common 

for consumer  equipment and  personal  use.  A  dynamic  IP  address  is  assigned  to  a 

device  by  our  ISP’s  Dynamic  Host  Configuration  Protocol  (DHCP)  servers.  The 

DHCP server typically uses network routers to assign addresses to devices. 

  Dynamic IP addresses 

Pros 

  Easy  configuration:  DHCP  servers  automatically  assign  IP  addresses  to  our 

devices, so we don’t need to worry about setting it up ourselves. 

  Cost: Dynamic IP addresses are usually cheaper than static IP addresses. 

  Unlimited IP addresses: Dynamic IP addresses can be reused. Whenever our 

devices  need  a  new  dynamic  IP  address,  our  network  or  router  can 

automatically configure them for us. 

  Security: Dynamic IP addresses make it more difficult for potential attackers 

to  locate  our  networked  devices.  This  is  because  dynamic  IP  addresses  can 

change  frequently,  so  it’s  harder  to  track  a  device.  This  helps  with  physical 

and  online  security.  We  can  also  increase  our  security  measures  by  using  a 

VPN. 

Cons 

101 

 
 
  DNS compatibility: If we wanted to host an email server, for example, it may 

be difficult to use a dynamic IP address because DNS doesn’t work well with 

dynamic IP addresses. We could use a dynamic DNS service, but those tend to 

be expensive. 

  Remote connectivity: If we don’t have the proper remote access software, it’ll 

be difficult to connect using a dynamic IP address. A VPN can help with this. 

 

Increased  downtime:  Sometimes,  our  ISP  can’t  assign  us  a  dynamic  IP 

address. This can slow down our internet connection. 

 

Inaccurate  geolocation:  Dynamic  IP  addresses  may  affect  our  geolocation 

services because our IP address may not reflect our physical location. 

  At the transport layer,  

TCP/IP defines three protocols: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), User Datagram 

Protocol (UDP), and Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP). At the network 

layer, the main protocol defined by TCP/IP is the Internetworking Protocol (IP); there 

are also some other protocols that support data movement in this layer.  

  Physical and Data Link Layers  

At the physical and data link layers, TCP/IP does not define any specific protocol. It  

supports  all  the  standard  and  proprietary  protocols.  A  network  in  a  TCP/IP 

internetwork  can be a local-area network or a wide-area network.  

  Network Layer  

At the network layer (or, more accurately, the internetwork layer), TCP/IP supports  

the Internetworking Protocol. IP, in turn, uses four supporting protocols: ARP, RARP, 

ICMP, and IGMP. Each of these protocols is described in greater detail in later units.  

  Internetworking Protocol (IP)  

The Internetworking Protocol (IP) is the transmission mechanism used by the TCP/IP  

protocols.  It  is  an  unreliable  and  connectionless  protocol--a  best-effort  delivery 

service. The term best effort means that IP provides no error checking or tracking. IP 

102 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assumes  the  unreliability  of  the  underlying  layers  and  does  its  best  to  get  a 

transmission through to  its destination, but  with  no guarantees.  IP transports data in 

packets  called  datagrams,  each  of  which  is  transported  separately.  Datagrams  can 

travel along different routes and can arrive out of sequence or be duplicated. IP does 

not keep track of the routes and has no facility for reordering data- grams once they 

arrive at their destination. The limited functionality of IP should not be considered a 

weakness, however. IP provides bare-bones transmission functions that free the user 

to  add  only  those  facilities  necessary  for  a  given  application  and  thereby  allows  for 

maximum efficiency.  

  Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) 

The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is used to associate a logical address with a  

physical address. On a typical physical network, such as a LAN, each device on a link  

is  identified  by  a  physical  or  station  address,  usually  imprinted  on  the  network 

interface card (NIC). ARP is  used to  find the physical  address  of the node  when its 

Internet address is known. ARP .  

  Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) 

The Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) allows a host to discover its Inter-  

net address when it knows only its physical address. It is used when a computer is con  

nected to a network for the first time or when a diskless computer is booted.   

The Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) is a mechanism used by hosts and  

gateways to send notification of datagram problems back to the sender. ICMP sends  

query and error reporting messages.  

  Internet Group Message Protocol  

The Internet Group Message Protocol (IGMP) is used to facilitate the simultaneous  

transmission of a message to a group of recipients.  

  Transport Layer  

Traditionally  the  transport  layer  was  represented  in  TCP/IP  by  two  protocols:  TCP 

and UDP. IP is a host-to-host protocol, meaning that it can deliver a packet from one  

103 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physical device to another. UDP and TCP are transport level protocols responsible  

for delivery of a message from a process (running program) to another process. A new  

transport layer protocol, SCTP, has been devised to meet the needs of some newer  

applications.  

  User Datagram Protocol  

The  User  Datagram  Protocol  (UDP)  is  the  simpler  of  the  two  standard  TCP/IP 

transport protocols.  It  is  a process-to-process  protocol  that adds  only port addresses, 

checksum error control, and length information to the data from the upper layer. UDP  

  Transmission Control Protocol  

The  Transmission  Control  Protocol  (TCP)  provides  full  transport-layer  services  to 

applications.  TCP  is  a  reliable  stream  transport  protocol.  The  term  stream,  in  this 

context, means connection-oriented: A connection must be established between both 

ends  of  a  transmission  before  either  can  transmit  data.  At  the  sending  end  of  each 

transmission, TCP divides a stream  of data into smaller units called segments. Each 

segment  includes  a  sequence  number  for  reordering  after  receipt,  together  with  an 

acknowledgment number for the segments received. Segments are carried across the 

internet inside of IP datagrams. At the receiving end, TCP collects each datagram as it 

comes in and reorders the transmission based on sequence numbers. Stream Control 

Transmission Protocol The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) provides 

support for newer applications such as voice over the Internet.  It is a transport layer 

protocol that combines the best features of UDP and TCP.  

3.4     Addressing-Physical, Logical, Port and Specific addresses. 

  ADDRESSING  

Four levels of addresses are used in an internet employing the TCP/IP protocols:  

physical (link) addresses, logical (IP) addresses, port addresses, and specific  

addresses . 

104 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each address is related to a specific layer in the TCP/IP architecture.  

  Physical Addresses  

The  physical  address,  also  known  as  the  link  address,  is  the  address  of  a  node  as 

defined by its LAN or WAN. It is included in the frame used by the data link layer. It 

is the lowest-level address. The size and format of these addresses vary depending on 

the  network.  For  example,  Ethernet  uses  a  6-byte  (48-bit)  physical  address  that  is 

imprinted  on  the  network  interface  card  (NIC).  In  Figure  ,a  node  with  physical 

address  10  sends  a  frame  to  a  node  with  physical  address  87.  The  two  nodes  are 

connected by a link (bus topology  LAN). At the data link layer, this  frame contains 

physical (link) addresses in the header. These are the only addresses needed. The rest 

of  the  header  contains  other  information  needed  at  this  level.  The  trailer  usually 

contains extra bits needed for error detection. As the figure shows, the computer with 

physical  address  10  is  the  sender,  and  the  computer  with  physical  address  87  is  the 

receiver.  The  data  link  layer  at  the  sender  receives  data  from  an  upper  layer.  It 

encapsulates  the  data  in  a  frame,  adding  a  header  and  a  trailer.  The  header,  among 

105 

 
 
 
 
 
other  pieces  of  information,  carries  the  receiver  and  the  sender  physical  (link) 

addresses.  Note  that  in  most  data  link  protocols,  the  destination  address,  87  in  this 

case, comes before the source address (10 in this case).  

The  intended  destination  computer,  however,  finds  a  match  between  the  destination 

address in the frame and its own physical address. The frame is checked, the header 

and trailer are dropped,  and the data part is  decapsulated and delivered to  the upper 

layer. 

Most  local-area  networks  use  a  48-bit  (6-byte)  physical  address  written  as  12 

hexadecimal  digits;  every  byte  (2  hexadecimal  digits)  is  separated  by  a  colon,  say 

07:0t:02:01:2C:4B,A 6-byte (12 hexadecimal digits) physical address 

  Logical Addresses  

Logical addresses are necessary for universal communications that are independent of  

underlying physical networks. Physical addresses are not adequate in an internetwork  

environment where different networks can have different address formats. A universal  

addressing system is needed in which each host can be identified uniquely, regardless  

of the underlying physical network.  

The logical addresses are designed for this purpose. A logical address in the  Internet 

is currently a 32-bit address that can uniquely define a host connected to the Internet. 

No  two  publicly  addressed  and  visible  hosts  on  the  Internet  can  have  the  same  IP 

address.  

  Example  

Figure  shows  a  part  of  an  internet  with  two  routers  connecting  three  LANs.  Each 

device  (computer  or  router)  has  a  pair  of  addresses  (logical  and  physical)  for  each 

connection.  In  this  case,  each  computer  is  connected  to  only  one  link  and  therefore 

has only one pair of addresses. Each router, however, is connected to three networks 

(only two are shown in the figure). So each router has three pairs of addresses, one for 

106 

 
 
 
 
each  connection.  Although  it  may  obvious  that  each  router  must  have  a  separate 

physical  address  for  each  connection,  it  may  not  be  obvious  why  it  needs  a  logical 

address for each connection.  

The computer with logical address A and physical address 10 needs to send a packet 

to  the  computer  with  logical  address  P  and  physical  address  95.  We  use  letters  to 

show  the  logical  addresses  and  numbers  for  physical  addresses.  The  sender 

encapsulates its data in a packet at the network layer and adds two logical addresses 

(A and P). Note that in  most protocols,  the logical  source address  comes before the 

logical destination address (contrary to the order of physical addresses). The network 

layer, however, needs to find the physical address of the next hop before the packet 

can  be  delivered.  The  network  layer  consults  its  routing  table  and  finds  the  logical 

address  of  the  next  hop  (router  1)  to  be  F.  The  ARP  discussed  previously  finds  the 

physical  address  of  router  1  that  corresponds  to  the  logical  address  of  20.  Now  the 

network layer passes this address to the data link layer, which in turn, encapsulates the  

packet with physical destination address 20 and physical source address 10.The frame 

is received by every device on LAN 1, but is discarded by all except router 1, which 

finds that the destination physical address in the frame matches with its own physical 

address.  The  router  decapsulates  the  packet  from  the  frame  to  read  the  logical 

destination address P. Since the logical destination address does not match the router's 

107 

 
 
 
 
logical  address,  the  router  knows  that  the  packet  needs  to  be  forwarded.  The  router 

consults its routing table and ARP to find the physical destination address of the next 

hop (router 2), creates a new frame, encapsulates the packet, and sends it to router 2.  

Note the physical addresses in the frame. The source physical address changes from 

10 to 99. The destination physical address changes from 20 (router 1 physical address) 

to  33 (router 2 physical  address). The logical  source  and destination addresses must 

remain  the  same;  otherwise  the  packet  will  be  lost.  At  router  2  we  have  a  similar 

scenario.  The  physical  addresses  are  changed,  and  a  new  frame  is  sent  to  the 

destination  computer.  When  the  frame  reaches  the  destination,  the  packet  is 

decapsulated.  The  destination  logical  address  P  matches  the  logical  address  of  the 

computer. The data are decapsulated from the packet and delivered to the upper layer. 

Note that although physical addresses will change from hop to hop, logical addresses 

remain the same from the source to destination.  

  Port Addresses  

The IP address and the physical address are necessary for a quantity of data to travel 

from  a source to  the destination host. However, arrival  at  the destination host is not 

the  final  objective  of  data  communications  on  the  Internet.  A  system  that  sends 

nothing but data from one computer to another is not complete. Today, computers are 

devices that can run multiple processes at the same time. The end objective of Internet 

communication  is  a  process  communicating  with  another  process.  For  example, 

computer A can communicate with computer C by using TELNET. At the same time, 

computer  A  communicates  with  computer  B  by  using  the  File  Transfer  Protocol 

(FTP). For these processes to receive data simultaneously, we need a method to label 

the  different  processes.  In  other  words,  they  need  addresses.  In  the  TCP/IP 

architecture, the label assigned to a process is called a port address. A port address in 

TCP/IP is 16 bits in length.  

  Example   

Suppose two computers are communicating via the Intermit. The sending computer is 

running  three  processes  at  this  time  with  port  addresses  a,  b,  and  c.  The  receiving 

computer is running two processes at this time with port addresses j and k. Process a 

in  the  sending  computer  needs  to  communicate  with  process  j  in  the  receiving 

computer. Note that although both computers are using the same application, FTP, for 

example, the port addresses are different because one is a client program and the other 

108 

 
 
is a server program. To show that data from process a need to be delivered to process 

j,  and  not  k,  the  transport  layer  encapsulates  data  from  the  application  layer  in  a 

packet and adds two port addresses (a and j), source and destination. The packet from 

the  transport  layer  is  then  encapsulated  in  another  packet  at  the  network  layer  with 

logical source and destination addresses (A and P). Finally, this packet is encapsulated 

in  a  frame  with  the  physical  source  and  destination  addresses  of  the  next  hop.  We 

have  not  shown  the  physical  addresses  because  they  change  from  hop  to  hop  inside 

the cloud designated as the Internet. A port address is a 16-bit address represented by 

one decimal number.  

  Specific Addresses  

Some  applications  have  user-friendly  addresses  that  are  designed  for  that  specific 

address. Examples include the e-mail address (for example, sumti@fhda.edu) and the 

Universal Resource Locator (URL) (for example, www. mhhe.com). The first defines 

the recipient of an e-mail, the second is used to find a document on the World Wide 

Web.  These  addresses,  however,  get  changed  to  the  corresponding  port  and  logical 

addresses by the sending computer. 

  IPv4 ADDRESSES 

 An  IPv4  address  is  a  32-bit  address  that  uniquely  and  universally  defines  the 

connection of a device (for example, a computer or a router) to the Internet. An IPv4 

address is 32 bits long.IPv4 addresses are unique. They are unique in the sense that 

109 

 
 
 
 
 
each  address  defines  one,  and  only  one,  connection  to  the  Internet.  Two  devices  on 

the Internet can never have the same address at the same time. We will see later that, 

by using some strategies, an address may be assigned to a device for a time period and 

then  taken  away  and  assigned  to  another  device.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  device 

operating at the network layer has m connections to the Internet, it needs to have m 

addresses.  We  will  see  later  that  a  router  is  such  a  device.  The  IPv4  addresses  are 

universal  in  the  sense  that  the  addressing  system  must  be  accepted  by  any  host  that 

wants to be connected to the Internet.  

  The IPv4 addresses are unique and universal. 

 Address Space  

A protocol such as IPv4 that defines addresses has an address space. An address space 

is  the  total  number  of  addresses  used  by  the  protocol.  If  a  protocol  uses  N  bits  to 

define  an  address,  the  address  space  is  2N  because  each  bit  can  have  two  different 

values  (0  or  1)  and  N  bits  can  have  2N  values.  IPv4  uses  32-bit  addresses,  which 

means that the address space is 232 or 4,294,967,296 (more than 4 billion). This means 

that, theoretically, if there were no restrictions, more than 4 billion devices could be 

connected  to  the  Internet.  We  will  see  shortly  that  the  actual  number  is  much  less 

because of the restrictions imposed on the addresses.  

  The address space of IPv4 is  232  or 4,294,967,296.  

Notations There are two prevalent notations to show an IPv4 address: binary notation 

and dotted(cid:2)decimal notation.  

  Binary Notation  

In  binary  notation,  the  IPv4  address  is  displayed  as  32  bits.  Each  octet  is  often 

referred to as a byte. So it is common to hear an IPv4 address referred to as a 32-bit 

address or a 4-byte address. The following is an example of an IPv4 address in binary 

notation: 01110101 10010101 00011101 00000010  

  Dotted-Decimal Notation  

To  make  the  IPv4  address  more  compact  and  easier  to  read,  Internet  addresses  are 

110 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
usually written in decimal form with a decimal point (dot) separating the bytes. The 

following is the dotted decimal notation of the above address:  

117.149.29.2  Figure  19.1  shows  an  IPv4  address  in  both  binary  and  dotted-decimal 

notation. Note that because each byte (octet) is 8 bits, each number in dotted-decimal 

notation is a value ranging from 0 to 255. 

Figure 3.4 Dotted-decimal notation and binary notation for an IPv4 address  

  IPv6 ADDRESSES: 

Structure 

An IPv6 address consists of 16 bytes (octets); it is 128 bits long. 

An IPv6 address is 128 bits long. 

Hexadecimal Colon Notation 

To make addresses more readable, IPv6 specifies hexadecimal colon notation. In this 

notation, 128 bits is divided into eight sections, each 2 bytes in length. Two bytes in 

hexadecimal notation requires four hexadecimal digits. Therefore, the address consists 

of  32  hexadecimal  digits,  with  every  four  digits  separated  by  a  colon,  as  shown  in 

Figure 3.4.1 

Figure 3.4.1 IPv6 address in binary and hexadecimal colon notation 

111 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviation  

Although the IP address, even in hexadecimal format, is very long, many of the digits 

are zeros. In this case, we can abbreviate the address. The leading zeros of a section 

(four  digits  between  two  colons)  can  be  omitted.  Only  the  leading  zeros  can  be 

dropped, not the trailing zeros (see Figure 19.15).  

Figure 3.4.2 Abbreviated IPv6 addresses  

Using this form of abbreviation, 0074 can be written as 74, OOOF as F, and 0000 as 

O. Note that  3210 cannot  be abbreviated. Further abbreviations are possible if there 

112 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are consecutive sections consisting of zeros only. We can remove the zeros altogether 

and  replace  them  with  a  double  semicolon.  Note  that  this  type  of  abbreviation  is 

allowed only once per address. If there are two runs of zero sections, only one of them 

can be abbreviated. Reexpansion of the abbreviated address is very simple: Align the 

unabbreviated portions and insert zeros to get the original expanded address.  

  Address Space 

 IPv6 has a much larger address space; 2128 addresses are available. The designers of 

IPv6 divided the address into several categories. A few leftmost bits, called the type 

prefix, in each address define its category. The type prefix is variable in length, but it 

is  designed  such  that  no  code  is  identical  to  the  first  part  of  any  other  code.  In  this 

way,  there  is  no  ambiguity;  when  an  address  is  given,  the  type  prefix  can  easily  be 

determined. 

8.3  SUMMARY  

In this unit, we learnt about the TCP/IP Protocol Suite, Physical, Data Link, network, 

Transport and an Application Layers. Addressing-Physical, Logical, Port and Specific 

addresses. 

8.4 KEYWORDS   

TCP/IP, UDP, ARP, URL 

8.5 QUESTIONS FOR SELF STUDY 

1. 

2. 

Explain TCP/IP Protocol Suite 

Discuss briefly   Physical, Data Link, Network, Transport and an Application 

Layers. 

3. 

Elucidate     Addressing-Physical, Logical, Port and Specific addresses. 

8.6  REFERENCE 

1.  Data  Communications  and  Networking  –  Behrouz  A.  Forouzan,  4th    Edition, 

Tata McGraw-Hill, 2006.  

2.  Communication  Networks:  Fundamental  Concepts  and  Key  Architectures  - 
Alberto Leon, Garcia and Indra Widjaja, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw- Hill, 2004.  

113 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Data  and  Computer  Communication,  William  Stallings,  8th  Edition,  Pearson 

Education, 2007.  

114 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 UNIT – 9:  PROTOCOLS 

Structure  

Objectives 

9.0 
9.1       Introduction 
TCP/IP suite 
9.2 
SMTP 
9.3 
9.4 
POP3 
9.5       SNMP  
9.6       HTTP 
9.7       DNS 
9.8       FTP 
9.9 
Summary 
9.10  Keywords 
9.11  Questions 
9.12  Reference 

9.0  OBJECTIVES 

After going through this lesson you will be able to 

  Describe TCP/IP protocol suite 

  Elucidate SMTP protocol 

  Understand POP3 protocol 

  Analyse SNMP protocol 

  Discuss HTTP protocol 

  Describe DNS protocol 

  Discuss FTP protocol 

9.1 

INTRODUCTION 

A  network  protocol  is  an  established  set  of  rules  that  determine  how  data  is  transmitted 

between  different  devices  in  the  same  network.  Essentially,  it  allows  connected  devices  to 

communicate  with  each  other,  regardless  of  any  differences  in  their  internal  processes, 

structure or design. Network protocols are the reason you can easily communicate with people 

all over the world, and thus play a critical role in modern digital communications. 

115 

 
 
 
 
 
9.2 

TCP/IP  PROTOCOL  SUITE 

The protocol stack used on the Internet is the Internet Protocol Suite. It is usually called 

TCP/IP  after  two  of  its  most  prominent  protocols, but  there  are  other  proto- cols as 

well. The TCP/IP model is based on a ﬁve-layer model for networking. From bottom 

(the  link)  to  top  (the  user  application),  these  are  the  physical,  data  link,  net-  work, 

transport, and application layers. Not all layers are completely deﬁned by the model, so 

these layers are “ﬁlled in” by external standards and protocols. The layers have names 

but no numbers, and although sometimes people speak of “Layer 2” or “Layer 3,” these 

are not TCP/IP terms. Terms like these are actually from the OSI Reference Model. 

The TCP/IP stack is open, which means that there are no “secrets” as to how it works. 

(There are “open systems” too, but with TCP/IP, the systems do not have to be “open” 

and  often  are  not.)  Two  compatible  end-system  applications  can  communicate 

regardless of their underlying architectures, although the connections between layers are 

not deﬁned. 

The TCP/IP or Internet model is not the only standard way to build a protocol suite or 

stack. The Open Standard Interconnection (OSI ) reference model is a seven- layer model 

that loosely maps into the ﬁve layers of TCP/IP. Until the Web became widely popular in 

the 1990s, the OSI reference model, with distinctive names and numbers for its layers, 

was  proposed  as  the  standard  model  for  all  communication networks.  Today, the  OSI 

reference  model  (OSI-RM)  is  often  used  as  a  learning  tool to introduce the functions of 

TCP/IP. 

The  TCP/IP  stack  is  comprised  of  modules.  Each  module  provides  a  speciﬁc 

function, but the modules are fairly independent. The TCP/IP layers contain relatively 

independent  protocols  that  can  be  used  depending  on  the  needs  of  the  system  to 

provide  whatever  function  is  desired.  In  TCP/IP,  each  higher  layer  protocol  is  sup- 

ported  by  lower  layer  protocols.  The  whole  collection  of  protocols  forms  a  type  of 

hourglass shape, with IP in the middle, and more and more protocols up or down 

from there. 

116 

 
 
 
Suite, Stack, and Model 

The  term  “protocol  stack”  is  often  used  synonymously  with  “protocol  suite”  as  an 

implementation of a reference model. However, the term “protocol suite” properly refers 

to a collection of all the protocols that can make up a layer in the reference model. The 

Internet  protocol  suite  is  an  example  of  the  Internet  or  TCP/IP  refer-  ence  model 

protocols, and a TCP/IP protocol stack implements one or more of these protocols at 

each layer. 

The TCP/IP Layers 

The TCP/IP protocol stack models a series of protocol layers for networks and systems 

that allows communications between any types of devices. The model consists of ﬁve 

separate but related layers, as shown in Figure 1.9. The Internet protocol suite is based 

on  these  ﬁve  layers. TCP/IP  says  most  about  the  network  and  transport  layers, and  a 

lot about the application layer. TCP/IP also deﬁnes how to interface the network layer 

with the data link and physical layers, but is not directly concerned with these two layers 

themselves. 

The Internet protocol suite assumes that a layer is there and available, so TCP/IP does 

not deﬁne the layers themselves. The stack consist of protocols, not implementa- tions, 

so describing a layer or protocols says almost nothing about how  these things should 

actually be built. 

Not all systems on a network need to implement all ﬁve layers of TCP/IP. Devices using 

the TCP/IP protocol stack fall into two general categories: a host or end system (ES) and 

an  intermediate  node  (often  a  router)  or  an  intermediate  system  (IS). The 

User Application Programs 

Application 

Layer 

Transport 

Layer 

Network 

Layer 

117 

 
 
Data Link 

Layer 

Physical 

Layer 

Network Link(s) 

FIGURE : The ﬁve layers of TCP/IP. Older models often show only four layers, combining 

the physical and data link layers. 

intermediate nodes usually only involve the ﬁrst three layers of TCP/IP (although many 

of them still have all ﬁve layers for other reasons, as we have seen). 

In TCP/IP, as with most layered protocols, the most fundamental elements of the process 

of sending and receiving data are collected into the groups that become the layers. Each 

layer’s  major  functions  are  distinct  from  all  the  others, but  layers  can be combined 

for performance reasons. Each implemented layer has an interface with the layers above 

and below it (except for the application and physical layers, of course) and provides its 

deﬁned service to the layer above and obtains services from the layer below. In other 

words, there is a service interface between each layer, but these are not standardized and 

vary widely by operating system. 

TCP/IP is designed to be comprehensive and ﬂexible. It can be extended to meet new 

requirements, and  has  been. Individual  layers  can  be  combined  for  implementation 

purposes, as long as the service interfaces to the layers remain intact. Layers can even 

be split when necessary, and new service interfaces deﬁned. Services are provided to 

the layer above after the higher layer provides the lower layer with the command, data, 

and necessary parameters for the lower layer to carry out the task. 

Layers  on  the  same  system  provide  and  obtain  services  to  and  from  adjacent  layers. 

However, a peer-to-peer protocol process allows the same layers on different systems to 

communicate. The term peer means every implementation of some layer is essentially 

equal to all others. There is no “master” system at the protocol level. Communications 

between peer layers on different systems use the deﬁned protocols appropriate to the 

given layer. 

118 

 
 
In other words, services refer to communications between layers within the same 

process, and  protocols  refer to communications between processes. This can be 

con- fusing, so more information about these points is a good idea. 

Protocols  and  Interfaces 

It  is  important  to  note  that  when  the  layers  of TCP/IP  are  on  different  systems, they 

are only connected at the physical layer. Direct peer-to-peer communication between all 

other  layers  is  impossible.  This  means  that  all  data  from  an  application  have  to  ﬂow 

“down” through all ﬁve layers at the sender, and “up” all ﬁve layers at the receiver to 

reach the correct process on the other system. These data are sometimes called a  ser- 

vice data unit (SDU). 

Each layer on the sending system adds information to the data it receives from the 

layer above and passes it all to the layer below (except for the physical layer, which 

has no lower layers to rely on in the model and actually has to send the bits in a 

form appropriate for the communications link used). 

Likewise, each layer on the receiving system unwraps the received message, often 

called a protocol data unit (PDU), with each layer examining, using, and stripping 

off the information it needs to complete its task, and passing the remainder up to 

the next layer (except for the application layer, which passes what’s left off to the 

application program itself). For example, the data link layer removes the wrapper 

meant for it, uses it to decide what it should do with this data unit, and then passes 

the remainder up to the network layer. 

Networking Basics 

Intermediate 

Intermediate 

Device A 

Device B 

4 

3 

4–5 Interface 

Transport 

3–4 Interface 

Network 

2–3 Interface 

Data Link 

2 

1–2 Interface 

1 

L3 

L2 

L1 

Peer-to-Peer Protocol at Layer 5 

Peer-to-Peer Protocol at Layer 4 

Network 

2–3 Interface 

Data Link 

1–2 Interface 

L3 

L2 

L1 

L3 

L2 

L1 

Network 

2–3 Interface 

Data Link 

1–2 Interface 

119 

5

4 

3 

4–5 Interface 

Transport 

3–4 Interface 

Network 

2–3 Interface 

Data Link 

1–2 Interface 

2 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 

 
 
FIGURE 1.10Physical  Communication  Links 

Protocols and interfaces, showing how devices are only physically connected at the lowest layer 

(Layer 1). Note that functionally, intermediate nodes only require the bottom three layers of the 

model. 

The whole interface and protocol process is shown in Figure 1.10. Although TCP/IP layers 

only have names, layer numbers are also used in the ﬁgure, but only for illustra- tion. (The 

numbers come from the ISO-RM.) 

As shown in the ﬁgure, there is a natural grouping of the ﬁve-layer protocol stack at the 

network layer and the transport layer. The lower three layers of TCP/IP, some- times called 

the network support layers, must be present and functional on all systems, regardless of the 

end system or intermediate node role. The transport layer links the upper and lower layers 

together. This layer can be used to make sure that what was sent was received, and what 

was  sent  is  useful  to  the  receiver  (and  not, for  example, a stray PDU misdirected to the 

host or unreasonably delayed). 

The process of encapsulation makes the whole architecture workable. Encapsu- lation of 

one layer’s information inside another layer is a key part of how TCP/IP works. 

THE LAYERS OF TCP/IP 

TCP/IP is mature and stable, and is the only protocol stack used on the Internet. This book 

is all about networking with TCP/IP, but it is easy to get lost in the particulars of TCP/IP 

if some discussion of the general tasks that TCP/IP is intended to accomplish is not included. 

This section takes a closer look at the TCP/IP layers, but only as a general guide to how the 

layers work. 

■  Physical  Layer:  Contains  all  the  functions  needed  to  carry  the  bit  stream  over  a 

physical medium to another system. 

■  Data Link Layer: Organizes the bit stream into a data unit called a “frame” and delivers 

the frame to an adjacent system. 

■  Network Layer:  Delivers data in the form of a packet from source to destina- tion, 

across as many links as necessary, to non-adjacent systems. 

■  Transport Layer: Concerned with process-to-process delivery of information. 

121 

 
 
 
 
■  Application  Layer:  Concerned  with  differences  in  internal  representation,user 

interfaces, and anything else that the user requires. 

9.3 

SMTP (SIMPLE MAIL TRANSFER PROTOCOL) 

SMTP is the standardization for transmission of electronic mails on the Internet. It is used by 

the e-mail server for sending and receiving messages, but the client host-based application only 

uses it for sending messages to the mail server. For receiving purposes, they use POP3 or IMAP. 

It is a TCP/IP application layer protocol and the TCP port used by the mail servers is 25 while 

the mail clients use the port 587 or 465 for communication. 

The outlook mail system of Microsoft system, Gmail and Yahoo mail, deploy SMTP for sending 

and retrieving emails from the exterior world whereas for interior mail exchange between their 

respective 

How SMTP works 

SMTP operates on a client/server model as a three-stage operation. Initially, an electronic mail 

server  uses SMTP to deliver an e-mail to the e-mail server from the Outlook or Gmail clients. 

Second, the e-mail server sends an e-mail to the e-mail server via SMTP as a relay tool. Third, 

to upload inbound mails via IMAP and position them on the recipient's inbox, the receiving 

server uses an email client. 

Components of SMTP 

First, we split down the SMTP client and the SMTP server into two elements such as User Agent 

(UA)  and  Message  Teansfer  Agent  (MTA).  The  User  Agent  (UA)  plans  the  message  and 

produces the box. The message is then inserted in the envelope. This mail is transferred over the 

internet through the mail transfer agent (MTA). 

Figure  4A.1:User  Agent  (UA)  and  Message  Teansfer  Agent 

(MTA) of SMTP 

122 

 
 
By incorporating a relay system, SMTP permits a more complex system. More MTAs may be 

included, either as a client or server in order to transmit the e-mail, ratherthan just an MTA at 

sending and an MTA at the receiving end. 

9.4 

POP3 

It is an easy protocol to access the e-mail boxes remotely. The RFC 1225 is the protocol. Version 

3 (POP3) of the Post Office Protocol is the protocol that helps a recipient to accept an email from 

the remote mail server. 

SMTP requires the host that receives the mail to be still online; otherwise it would be impossible 

to bind to TCP. On behalf of the customers, the POP server collects the mail. 

Figure 4A.5: Delivery by POP3 

A POP3 server can hold messages for each user before a POP3 client such as Microsoft Outlook 

98, Microsoft Outlook Express and Microsoft Mail and News links to the downloads and reads. 

A POPS client sits in a Transmission Control  Protocol session (TPT) using a TCP port 110, logs 

in to the internet and then issues a set of POP3 commands to receive a POP3 message from a 

POP3 server. 

stat: It  asks  the  server  for  the  number  of  messages  waiting  to  be retrieved. 

list: It determines the size of each message to be retrieved. 

retr: It retrieves  individual  messages  d.   

Quit: Ends the  POP3 session. 

Though POP3 has experienced a number of changes, the developers maintained that a three-stage 

process was  followed between the customer and  the server during mail  retrieval.  They tried to 

123 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make this protocol very easy and today it is very popular with this simplification. 

Let's understand the working of the POP3 protocol. 

                              Figure: Working of POP3 

The POP3 server asks for the POP3 client user name in order to create a connection between the 

server POP3 and the POP3 client. If the POP3 server identifies the user name, the ok message is 

sent. Then it asks  the POP3  client's password and then transfers the POP3  client  to  the POP3 

server. The POP3 server sends an OK message if the password fits, and the link is established. 

The client will see the POP3  mail  server  mail  list  after  establishing  a  connection.  In  the mail 

list, the customer gets the server email numbers and sizes. The user will launch mail recovery 

from this collection. Once the client receives all of the user addresses, all the server emails will 

be removed. We may also assume that emails are only contained on a certain computer, so that 

the same mails cannot be read on another machine. The emailed settings can be modified to leave 

an email copy on the email server to resolve this condition. 

Advantages of POP3 protocol 

       The following are the advantages of a POP3 protocol: 

  Users can read an electronic offline email. Only when uploading e-mails from the cloud 

124 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would an internet connection entail. Until the emails are downloaded from the cloud, all 

of the mails downloaded  can  be  obtained  without  internet  from  our  PC  or hard disk 

of  your  phone.  There  is,  therefore,  no  permanent Internet  connectivity  in  the  POP3 

protocol. 

  Secure and fast access to e-mails, because they are saved on our PC already. 

  The size of the email we receive or send does not restrict. 

  Less space for server store is needed when all the mail on the local computer is stored. 

  The mailbox has the full mailbox capacity, but the hard disk size is limited. 

  The protocol is simple, so it is one of today's most common protocols. Configuring and 

using is simple. 

Disadvantages of POP3 protocol 

  The following are the advantages of a POP3 protocol: 

  When e-mails from a server are downloaded, all mails are default removed from the server. 

Therefore, mails from other computers cannot be read without a backup of the email on 

the server being configured. 

 

It can be difficult to move the mail folder from the  local computer to another machine. 

  Since  all  attachments  are  placed  on  your  local  computer,  if  the 

  virus scanner does not search them, then the possibility of a virus attack would be high. 

The assault of the virus could destroy the machine. 

  The downloaded email directory of the mail server will corrupt it as well. 

  The mail would be stored at the local machine, allowing anyone on the computer to enter 

the folder of the email. 

9.5 

SNMP 

SNMP  stands  for  the  for  simple  network  management  protocol.  SNMP  is  an  internet  device 

control system. It offers a series of internet surveillance and management activities. SNMP has the 

boss and agent in two components. The director is a host who manages and tracks a variety of 

organizations like routers. It is a protocol on the application layer where a few manager stations 

can  accommodate  a  number  of  operators.  On  the  level  of  implementation,  the  protocol  can 

monitor devices produced by various manufacturers and deployed on various physical networks. 

This network consists of heterogeneous LANs and WANs linked by routers or gateway. 

Managers & Agents 

A controller is a host operating SNMP client, while the agent is a router running the SNMP server 

software. Internet management is accomplished by simple dialog between a boss and an agent. 

125 

 
 
 
 
The agent is used to maintain records in a database while the manager is used for data access. For 

example,  a  router  can  store  suitable  variables  such  as  certain  received  and  forwarded  packets, 

while  the  manager  can  compare  those  variables  to  decide  whether  the  router  is  loaded  or  not. 

Agents are also able to assist with the management process. When something goes wrong, an agent 

sends an alert to the server software on the agent 

Management with SNMP has three basic ideas: 

A manager tests the agent by asking the data which represents the agent's behaviour. 

A manager also forces a certain role to be exercised by resetting the value in the agent database. 

An Agent also contributes by advising the manager of an unusual situation to the management 
process. 

SNMP 

SNMP defines five types of messages: Get Request, Get Next Request, Set Request, Get Response, 

and Trap. 

Get Request: The Get Request message is sent to the agent (server) from a manager (client) to 

get the variable value. 

Get Next Request: The Message Get Next Request is sent from the administrator to the agent to 

get the variable value. The value of the entries  in  a  table  is  derived  from  this  sort  of  post.  If 

the  manager does not know the entry indices, he cannot locate the values. The Message Get Next 

Request is used to describe an entity in such contexts. 

Get  Response:  In  addition  to  the  Get  Request  and  Get  Next  Request query,  the  Get  Reponse 

message is submitted by the agent to the boss. This message includes the manager's requested 

value for an attribute. 

126 

 
 
 
 
 
Set Request: The message Set Request is sent by the manager to the agent to specify a value in a 

variable. 

              Figure: Types of SNMP Messages 

Trap: Trap message is  sent  by  an  employee to  an event  planner.  For instance, if the agent  is 

restarted, it notifies the manager and sends the reboot time. 

9.6 

HTTP 

A protocol at the application level for distributed, shared, hyper mediated information systems is 

the Hypertext  Transfer Protocol (HTTP). Since 1990, this has become the basis  of  the World 

Wide Web data exchange (i.e., internet). HTTP is a generic and stateless protocol, that can also 

be used with extensions to its request methods, error codes and headers for other purposes. The 

HTTP  is  primarily  a  TCP/IP  networking  protocol  used  for  delivering World Wide Web data 

(HTML files, picture files, query  results, and so on). TCP 80 is the main port, although other 

ports can  also  be  used.  Computers  interact  with  each  other  in  a  structured  manner.  The  HTTP 

defines how the request data of clients are constructed, transmitted and responded to the server by 

the servers. 

Features of HTTP are: 

There are three basic features that make HTTP a simple but powerful protocol: 

127 

 
 
 
 
 
 
HTTP is connectionless: The HTTP client, i.e., a browser starts an HTTP request and the client 

waits for the answer after a request is made. The server handles the request and sends a reply to 

the client, then client disconnects the link. Thus, during current request and response, the client 

and server know each other. New connections are made with new requests. 

HTTP is media independent: HTTP is a media-independent protocol that means every data form 

can  be  transmitted  via  HTTP,  as  long  as  both  the  server  and the recipient know how to manage 

the data contents. The type of content must be specified in the MIME type header for both the 

client and the server. 

HTTP is stateless: HTTP is a stateless protocol as both the client and server know each other only 

during the current request. Due to this nature of the protocol, both the client and server do not 

retain the information between various requests of the web pages. 

Basic Architecture 

The following diagram shows a very basic architecture of a web application and depicts where 

HTTP sits: 

Figure 4.1: HTTP Protocol Architecture 

The  HTTP  protocol  is  an  architectural  client/server request/response  protocol  where  web 

browsers, robots and search engines, etc. function as HTTP clients, and the Web server functions 

as a server. The HTTP uses the principle of Uniform Resource Locator (URL)for clients who wish 

to access a database over the internet and who need address and promote  access to documents. 

The figure above shows the HTTP transaction from client to server. Through sending the request 

message to the server, the recipient initiates a transaction. A response message is sent from the 

server to the request. 

128 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.7 

DNS (Domain Name Server) 

If any user from the personal computer, laptop or tablet uses the Internet and tries to login into 

some website then the user is  using DNS for sure. Thus it is  very important  to  understand the 

working on a domain name server. 

PC’s, laptop or tablets don’t understand the language of a web address, which means the domain 

name like Google.com to make them understand for which site we are looking for. Thus DNS 

came into the role and provides the host with the mapped IP address in respect to the domain name 

of the website. 

As shown in the above figure, when we request for a web page from our PC on the Internet like 

PC1 is requesting for www.softwaretestinghelp.com, then resolving the domain name query and 

providing the respective IP address in return is the part of work of the DNS server. 

DNS  server  stores  the  database  of  all  the  relevant  IP  addresses  mapped  with  their  respective 

domain names. 

The DNS query for requesting the  IP address  in  respect  to  the domain name goes to  the DNS 

server 1 from PC1. The server checks within itself, if it has the IP address regarding the query, 

and it returns a DNS response with the resolution. 

Otherwise, it forwards it to another DNS server 2 requesting for information. This time it gets the 

resolution from the DNS 2 and it gets mapped with the IP address i.e. 10.150.120.2 corresponding 

to the Domain name in response and sends it back to PC1. 

The PC1 now have the destination IP address and it can communicate further with the known IP 

address as per the routing. 

129 

 
 
Now the question arises, as of how the PC will come to know which DNS should be used to get 

the IP address. 

The answer to this is when we connect our system to the ISP, the network devices like a router or 

switch which assigns the routing information and other configurations as well send which or how 

many DNS server the PC should connect with to get the address translation. 

9.8 

FTP (File Transfer Protocol) 

It is one of the widely used application layer protocol of the TCP/IP protocol suite. FTP is basically 

used to exchange data between two host devices over the Internet or Intranet securely. 

It is referred to as one of the safest modes of file sharing among systems, and thus it is deployed 

by large industries, universities, and offices. 

It works in the client-server model and thus the user needs an FTP client program to run FTP on 

its system. The common types of FTP client program include Filezilla and Dreamweaver etc. 

The data transfer takes place only in one direction at a time. The FTP protocol carry out many 

duties apart from file transfer like creation and deletion of data files, listing, renaming, etc. 

The FTP Model 

In this model, one host behaves as the client and another host as a server. The one who requests 

for file-sharing or data is the client host and one which in response completes the request is the 

server host. 

Firstly,  the  FTP  connection  is  established  between  the  client  and  server  computer  and  data 

exchange take place after that. Two channels come into the picture of FTP connection i.e. control 

channel and data channel. 

The control channel establishes the connection between the client and server and remains open for 

the overall session. The control channel port number is 21 in TCP/IP. While the data channel opens 

when the client request for a file sharing and get closed after the completion of the request by the 

server. 

130 

 
 
Two  processes  naming  data  transfer  process  (DTP)  and  protocol  interpreter  (PI)  are  used  in 

managing the communication between the client and the server. The DTP establishes and manages 

the connection for the data channel, while PI manages the DTP by applying commands given by 

the control channel. 

The server host end PI is accountable for analyzing the commands received from the client host 

end via the control channel, connection establishment, and in running the DTP. The client PI is 

accountable  for  forwarding  the  FTP  commands,  receiving  the  response  from  the  server  and 

establishment of the connection with the FTP server. 

After  the  establishment  of  a  connection  between  the  FTP  client  and  the  FTP  server,  the  client 

builds up the connection and sends the FTP commands to the server. The server analyzes them 

and in response completes the request. 

Now the server end PI sends the port detail on which the files will be forwarded to the client DTP. 

The client DTP then waits for the data to arrive at the decided port from the server. 

The FTP Response 

To make out a secure and reliable file transfer between the client and server, it is important that 

the server and client should remain in synchronization with each other. 

Thus for each command executed by the client, a user is acknowledged by the response and the 

action is performed by the server host in order. The response consists of a 3 digit code plus a text 

(a character string is separated from digit by a space) denoting the processing of the commands. 

131 

 
 
 
 
 
9.9 

SUMMARY 

In this unit we have learnt the concept of TCP/IP suite.  We also discussed SMTP and POP3 

protocols. At the end of this unit reader are able to figure out the concepts of SNMP, HTTP, 

DNS and FTP. 

9.10 

KEYWORDS 

TCP/IP, SMTP, POP3, SNMP, HTTP, DNS and FTP 

9.11 
1. 

QUESTIONS 
Explain TCP/IP protocol suite. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Discuss SMTP protocol. 

With neat diagram explain POP3. 

Describe HTTP protocol. 

Discuss DNS protocol. 

Briefly explain FTP protocol. 

9.12 

REFERENCES 

 Introduction to Data Communications and Networking by Behrouz Forouzan.  

 Computer Networks by Andrew S Tanenbaum. 

 Networking Essentials – Third Edition – Jeffrey S. Beasley, Piyasat Nilkaew 

Structure  

10.0 Objectives 

10.1 Introduction 

UNIT – 10: PROTOCOLS 

132 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.2 ARP 

10.3 RARP 

10.4 ICMP 

10.5 IGMP 

10.6   OSPF 

10.7   BGP 

10.8  Summary 

10.9  Keywords 

10.10  Questions 

10.11  Reference 

10.0   OBJECTIVES 

At the end of this unit you will be able to 

  Understand the concept of ARP protocol 

  Discuss RARP protocol 

  Elucidate ICMP and IGMP 

  Describe OSPF protocol 

  Explain BGP protocol  

10.1 

INTRODUCTION 

The  OSI  model,  and  any  other  network  communication  model,  provide  only  a  conceptual 

framework for communication between computers, but the model itself does not provide specific 

methods  of  communication.  Actual  communication  is  defined  by  various  communication 

protocols. In the context of data communication, a protocol is a formal set of rules, conventions 

and data structure that governs how computers and other network devices exchange information 

over  a  network.  In  other  words,  a  protocol  is  a  standard  procedure  and  format  that  two  data 

communication devices must understand, accept and use to be able to talk to each other. Protocols 

of  different layer as shown in the below diagram. 

133 

 
 
 
 
 
 
10.2  ADDRESS RESOLUTION PROTOCOL (ARP) 

The  Address  Resolution  Protocol  (ARP)  is  used  to  associate  a  logical  address with  a  physical 

address. On a typical physical network, such as a LAN, each device on a link is identified by a 

physical or station address, usually imprinted on the network interface card (NIC). 

ARP is used to find the physical address of a node when its Internet address (IP address) is known. 

If a machine talks to another machine in the same network, it requires its physical or MAC address. 

But, since the application has given the destination's IP address it requires some mechanism to 

bind  the  IP  address  with  its  MAC  address.  This  is  done  through  Address  Resolution  protocol 

(ARP).IP address of the destination node is broadcast and the destination node informs the source 

of its MAC address. 

  Assume broadcast nature of LAN 

  Broadcast IP address of the destination 

  Destination replies it with its MAC address. 

  Source maintains a cache of IP and MAC address bindings 

But this means that every time machine A wants to send packets to machine B, A has to send an 

ARP packet to resolve the MAC address of B and hence this will increase the traffic load too much, 

so  to  reduce  the  communication cost  computers  that  use  ARP  maintains  a  cache  of  recently 

acquired  IP_to_MAC  address  bindings,  i.e.  they  do  not  have  to  use  ARP  repeatedly.  Several 

134 

 
 
 
refinements  of  ARP  are  possible:  When  machine  A  wants  to  send  packets  to  macine  B,  it  is 

possible that machine B is going to send packets to machine A in the near future. So to avoid ARP 

for machine B, A should put its IP_to_MAC address binding in the special packet while requesting 

for the MAC address of B. Since A broadcasts its initial request for the MAC address of B, every 

machine on the network should extract and store in its cache the IP_to_MAC address binding of 

A When a new machine appears on the network (e.g. when an operating system reboots) it can 

broadcast its IP_to_MAC address binding so that all other machines can store it in their caches. 

This will eliminate a lot of ARP packets by all other machines, when they want to communicate 

with this new machine. 

10.3 

REVERSE ADDRESS RESOLUTION PROTOCOL 

The Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) allows a host to discover its Internet address 

when it knows only its physical address. It is used when a computer is connected to a network for 

the first time or when a diskless computer is booted. 

RARP is a protocol by which a physical machine in a local area network can request to learn its IP 

address from a gateway server's Address Resolution Protocol table or cache. This is needed since 

the machine may not have permanently attached disk where it can store its IP address permanently. 

A  network administrator  creates a table in  a local  area  network's  gateway router that  maps  the 

physical  machine  (or  Medium  Access  Control  -  MAC)  addresses  to  corresponding  Internet 

Protocol addresses. When a new machine is set up, its RARP client program requests from the 

RARP server on the router to be sent its IP address. Assuming that an entry has been set up in the 

router table, the RARP server  will return the  IP  address  to  the machine  which can store it for 

future use. 

Drawbacks of RARP 

  Since it operates at low level, it requires direct addresses to the network which makes 

it difficult for an application programmer to build a server. 

  It doesn't fully utilizes the capability of a network like Ethernet which is enforced to 

send a minimum packet  size since the reply from  the server contains only one small 

piece of information, the 32-bit internet address. 

10.4 

INTERNET CONTROL MESSAGE PROTOCOL (ICMP) 

The Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) is a mechanism used by hosts and gateways to 

send notification of datagram problems back to the sender. ICMP sends query and error reporting 

messages. 

This protocol discusses a mechanism that gateways and hosts use to communicate control or error 

information. The Internet protocol provides unreliable, connectionless datagram service, and that 

a datagram travels from gateway to gateway until it reaches one that can deliver it directly to its 

135 

 
final destination. If a gateway cannot route or deliver a datagram, or if the gateway detects an unusual 

condition,  like  network  congestion,  that  affects  its  ability to forward the  datagram,  it needs  to 

instruct the original source to take action to  avoid  or  correct  the  problem.  The  Internet  Control 

Message Protocol allows gateways to send error or control messages to other gateways or hosts; 

ICMP provides communication between the Internet Protocol software on one machine and the 

Internet Protocol software on another. This is a special purpose message mechanism added by the 

designers to the TCP/IP protocols. This  is  to  allow  gateways  in  an  internet  to  report  errors  or 

provide  information about unexpected circumstances. The  IP protocol itself contains nothing to 

help the sender test connectivity or learn about failures. 

Error reporting vs. Error Correction 

ICMP only reports error conditions to the original source; the source must relate errors to 

individual application programs and take action to correct problems. It provides a way for 

gateway to report the error It does not fully specify the action to be taken for each possible 

error. ICMP is restricted to communicate with the original source  but  not  intermediate 

sources. ICMP Message Delivery 

ICMP messages travel across the internet in the data portion of an IP datagram, which itself 

travels across the internet in the data portion of an IP datagram, which itself travels across 

each physical network in the data portion of a frame. Datagram carrying ICMP messages 

are  routed  exactly  like  datagram  carrying  information  for  users;  there  is  no  additional 

reliability or  priority.  An  exception  is  made  to  the  error  handling  procedures  if  an  IP 

datagram carrying an ICMP messages are not generated for errors that result from datagram 

carrying ICMP error messages. 

ICMP Message Format 

It has three fields; an 8-bit integer message TYPE field that identifies the message, an 8-bit 

CODE  field  that  provides  further  information  about  the  message  type,  and  a  16-bit 

CHECKSUM field (ICMP uses the same additive checksum algorithm as IP, but the ICMP 

checksum only covers the ICMP message).In addition, ICMP messages that report errors 

always include the header and first 64 data bits of the datagram causing the problem. The 

ICMP TYPE field defines the meaning of the message as well as its format. 

The Types include: 

TYPE FIELD       ICMP MESSAGE TYPE 

0 

3 

4 

ECHO REPLY 

DESTINATION UNREACHABLE 

SOURCE QUENCH 

136 

 
5 

8 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

REDIRECT(CHANGE A ROUTE) 

ECHO REQUEST 

TIME EXCEEDED FOR A DATAGRAM 

PARAMETER PROBLEM ON A DATAGRAM 

IMESTAMP REQUEST 

TIMESTAMP REPLY 

INFORMATION REQUEST(OBSOLETE) 

INFORMATION REPLY(OBSOLETE) 

ADDRESS MASK REQUEST 

ADDRESS MASK REPLY TESTING DESTINATION 

10.5 

INTERNET GROUP MESSAGE PROTOCOL (IGMP) 

The Internet Group Message Protocol (IGMP) is used to facilitate the simultaneous transmission 

of a message to a group of recipients. 

It is a communications protocol used by hosts and adjacent routers on IPv4 networks to establish 

multicast group memberships. IGMP is an integral part of IP multicast. 

IGMP can be used for one-to-many networking  applications  such  as online streaming video and 

gaming, and allows more efficient use of resources when supporting these types of applications. 

IGMP is used on  IPv4  networks. Multicast management on  IPv6  networks is handled              by 

Multicast        Listener        Discovery (MLD)        which uses ICMPv6 messaging in contrast to 

IGMP's bare IP encapsulation. 

Types of messages in IGMP 

IGMP has three types of messages: the query, the membership report, and the leave report. There 

are two types of query messages as shown in the figure below: general and special. 

Fig: Types of messages in IGMP 

137 

 
 
 
10.6  OPEN SHORTEST  PATH FIRST (OSPF) 

The 

Open  Shortest  Path  First  OSPF  protocol 

is  an 

intradomain 

routing 

protocol,  its  based  on  the  concept  of  link  state  routing  protocol.  Its  domain  is  also  called  an 

autonomous system. OSPF protocol divides an autonomous system into areas and subsections. An 

area is a group of networks, hosts, and routers all contained within an autonomous system. An 

autonomous system can be split into many different areas. All networks inside an area must be 

connected  to  each  other  through  a  link.  Routers  inside  an  area  flood  the  area  with  the  help  of 

routing  information.  At  the  border  or  boundary  of  an  area,  special  routers  called  area  border 

routers. the areas  inside  an  autonomous  system  is  a  special  area  called  the  backbone AS. 

All the areas inside an AS must be connected to the backbone of the system. The area identification 

of the backbone is zero. Figure 8.8 shows an autonomous system and its areas. 

Fig. Areas in an autonomous system 

 Types of Links in OSPF: 

A  connection  is  called  a  link.  Four  types  of  links  have  been defined: 

  point-to-point, 

 

transient, 

  stub, and 

  virtual 

  A point-to-point link connects two routers without any help of any other host or router in 

138 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between.  An  example  of  this  type  of  link is  two  routers  connected  to  each  other  by  a 

telephone line or a T line. There is no requirement to assign a network address to this type 

of link. 

  Fig. Point-to-point link 

  A transient link is a network link with several routers attached with each other. The data 

can come into the network through any of the routers and leave through any router.  For 

example, consider theEthernet  in  Figure  18.  Router  A  has  routers  B,  C,  D,  and  E 

as neighbor’s nodes. Router B has routers A, C, D, and E as neighbor’s nodes. 

                                                   Fig. Transient link 

  A  stub  link  is  a  network  that  is  connected  to  only  one  router  in the network. The data 

packets come into the network through this single router and leave the network through 

this same router. 

                                          Fig. Stub link 

When the link between two routers is broken, the management may create a virtual link between 

two routers, using a longer path that probably goes through several routers. 

10.7  BORDER GATEWAY PROTOCOL (BGP) 

139 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Border Gateway Protocol is an interdomain routing protocol, 

It uses path vector routing. For example, a large business that manages its own network and has 

full control over it is an autonomous system. A local ISP that provides services to local customers 

is  called  an  autonomous  system.  This  divides  autonomous systems  into  three  categories:  stub, 

multihomed, and transit. 

Stub AS. A stub AS has only one connection to another AS. The interdomain data traffic in a stub 

AS can be either created or terminated in the AS. 

Multihomed AS. A multihomed AS has  more than one connection to other ASs, but it is still 

only a source or sink for data traffic. 

Transit AS. A transit AS is a multihomed AS that also allows temporary traffic. Good examples 

of transit ASs are national and international ISPs (Internet backbones). 

External and Internal BGP 

BGP has two types of sessions: external BGP (E-BGP) and internal BGP sessions. The E-BGP 

session is used to interchange information between two speaker nodes. It belongs to two different 

AS.  The  I-BGP  session  is  used  to  exchange  routing  information between two routers inside 

an AS. Figure 21 shows the details 

                                     Fig.  Internal and external BGP sessions 

BGP squint advertises routes to each other on the network. Two of the more important attributes 

are AS-PATH and NEXT- HOP: 

AS-PATH: 

This attribute contains the ASs through which the advertisement for the prefix has passed. When 

a prefix is passed into an AS, the AS adds its ASN to the ASPATH attribute. 

NEXT-HOP: 

Providing the critical link between the inter-AS and intra-AS routing protocols, the NEXT-HOP 

140 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attribute has a subtle but important use. The NEXT-HOP is the router interface that begins the 

AS-PATH. 

BGP Route Selection 

AS BGP uses eBGP and iBGP to distribute routes to all the routers. From this issue, a router may 

learn about  more than one route to any one prefix, in which case the router must select one of 

the possible routes. The input into the route selection process is the set  of  all  routes  that  have 

been  acquired  and  accepted  by  the  router. If there are more than two routes to the same prefix, 

then BGP sequentially invokes the following elimination rules until one route remains: 

  Routes are assigned a local priority value as one of their attributes. The local priority 

of a route could have been set by the router. This is a policy decision that is boosted 

up  to  the  AS’s  network  administrator.  The  routes  with  the  giant  local  preference 

values are selected. 

  The route with the shortest path (AS-PATH) is selected. If this rule applies the only 

rule  for  route  selection,  then  BGP  would  be  using  a  DV  algorithm  for  path 

determination, where the distance metric uses the number of AS hops preferably than 

the number of router hops. 

  From  the  endure  routes  the  route  with  the  closest  NEXT-HOP  router  is  selected. 

Here, closest means cost of the least-cost path, set on by the intra-AS algorithm, is 

the smallest 

 

If more than one route is still leftover, the router uses BGP identifiers to select the 

route. 

10.8 

    SUMMARY 

      In this unit we have discussed in detail ARP protocol and also covered RARP and also discussed 

about ICMP and IGMP protocols. At the end of this unit also covered in detail about OSPF and 

BGP protocols. 

10.9 

    KEYWORDS 

           ARP, RARP, ICMP, IGMP, OSPF and BGP 

10.10 

    QUESTIONS 

1. Describe ARP protocol. 

2. Explain RARP protocol. 

141 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
3. Discuss ICMP protocol. 

4. Explain Types of messages in IGMP 

5. Briefly explain types of link in OSPF. 

6. Elucidate BGP protocol. 

10.11  

  REFERENCE  

 

Introduction to Data Communications and Networking by Behrouz Forouzan.  

  Computer Networks by Andrew S Tanenbaum. 

  Networking Essentials – Third Edition – Jeffrey S. Beasley, Piyasat Nilkaew 

UNIT – 11: PACKET SWITCHING NETWORKS 

Structure  

11.0 Objectives 

11.1 Introduction 

11.2 Packet switching networks 

11.3 Network services and internal network operations 

11.4  Summary 

11.5  Keywords 

11.6  Questions 

11.7  Reference 

11.0  OBJECTIVES 

At the end of this unit you will be able to 

  Elucidate Packet switching networks 

  Discuss Network services and network operations 

142 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.1 

INTRODUCTION 

Packet switching is the transfer of small pieces of data across various networks. These data chunks 

or “packets” allow for faster, more efficient data transfer. Often, when a user sends a file across a 

network, it gets transferred in smaller data packets, not in one piece. For example, a 3MB file will 

be  divided  into  packets,  each  with  a  packet  header  that  includes  the  origin  IP  address,  the 

destination IP address, the number of packets in the entire data file, and the sequence number. 

There are two major types of packet switching: 

Connectionless Packet Switching. This classic type of packet switching includes multiple packets, 

each individually routed. This means each packet contains complete routing information—but it 

also means different paths of transmission and out-of-order delivery are possible, depending on 

the fluctuating loads on the network’s nodes (adapters, switches and routers) at the moment. This 

kind of packet switching is sometimes called datagram switching. 

Each packet in connectionless packet switching includes the following information in its header 

section: 

  Source address 

  Destination address 

  Total number of packets 

  Sequence number (Seq#) for reassembly 

Once the packets reach their destination via various routes, the receiving devices rearrange them 

to form the original message. 

Connection-Oriented  Packet  Switching.  In  connection-oriented  packet  switching,  also  called 

virtual circuit switching or circuit switching, data packets are first assembled and then numbered. 

They  then  travel  across  a  predefined  route,  sequentially.  Address  information  is  not  needed  in 

circuit switching, because all packets are sent in sequence. 

11.2  PACKET SWITCHING NETWORKS 

Traditional  telephone  networks  operate  on  the  basis  of  circuit  switching.  A  call setup  process 

reserves resources (time slots) along a path so that the stream of voice samples can be transmitted 

with very low delay across the network. The resources allocated to a call cannot be used by other 

users  for  the  duration  of  the call.  This  approach  is  inefficient  when  the  amount  of  information 

transferred  is  small  or  if  information  is  produced  in  bursts,  as  is  the  case  in  many  computer 

143 

 
 
applications. In this chapter we examine networks that transfer blocks of information called packets. 

Packet-switching networks are better matched to computer applications  and  can  also  be  designed  to 

support real-time applications such as telephony. 

We can view packet networks from two perspectives. One perspective involves an external view 

of the network and is concerned with the services that the network provides to the transport layer 

that operates above it at the end systems. Here we are concerned with whether the network service 

requires the setting up of a connection and whether the transfer of user data is provided with quality-

of-service guarantees. Ideally the definition of the network services is independent of the underlying 

network and transmission technologies. This approach allows the transport layer and the applications 

that operate above it to be designed so that they can function over any network that provides the 

given services. 

A second perspective on packet networks is concerned with the internal operation of a network. 

Here we look at the physical topology of a network, the interconnection of links, switches, and 

routers. We are concerned with the approach that is used to direct information across the network: 

datagrams, or virtual circuits.  We are also concerned with addressing and routing procedures, as well 

as with dealing with congestion inside the network. We must also manage traffic flows so that the 

network can deliver information with the quality of service it has committed to. 

It is useful to compare these two perspectives in the case of broadcast net- works and LANs from the 

previous chapter and the switched packet networks considered here. The first perspective, involving 

the services provided to the layer above, does not differ in a fundamental way between broadcast 

and switched packet networks. The second perspective, however, is substantially different. In the case 

of LANs, the network is small, addressing is simple, and the frame is transferred in one hop so no 

routing  is  required.  In  the  case  of  packet-switching networks,  addressing  must  accommodate 

extremely large-scale networks and must work in concert with appropriate routing algorithms. These 

two challenges, addressing and routing, are the essence of the network layer. 

In this chapter we deal with the general issues regarding packet-switching networks. Later chapters 

deal with specific architectures, namely, Internet Protocol (IP) packet networks and asynchronous 

transfer mode (ATM) packet networks. The chapter is organized as follows: 

  Network services and internal network operation. We elaborate on the two  perspectives on 

networks, and we discuss the functions of the network layer, including internetworking. 

  Physical  view  of  networks.  We  examine  typical  configurations  of  packet-  switching 

networks. This section defines the role of multiplexers, LANs, switches,  and  routers  in 

network and internetwork operation. 

  Datagrams and virtual circuits. We introduce the two basic approaches to operating a packet 

network, and we use IP and ATM as examples of these approaches. 

144 

 
 
Packet switching is a method of transferring the data to a network in form of packets.  In order 

to transfer the file fast and efficiently manner over the network and minimize the transmission 

latency, the data is broken into small pieces of variable length, called Packet. At the destination, 

all  these  small  parts  (packets)  have  to  be  reassembled,  belonging  to  the  same  file.  A  packet 

composes of payload and various control information. No pre-setup or reservation of resources 

is needed.  

Packet  Switching  uses Store  and  Forward technique  while  switching  the  packets;  while 

forwarding  the  packet  each  hop  first  stores  that  packet  then  forward.  This  technique  is  very 

beneficial because packets may get discarded at any hop due to some reason. More than one path 

is  possible  between  a  pair  of  sources  and  destinations.  Each  packet  contains  Source  and 

destination address using which they independently travel through the network. In other words, 

packets  belonging  to  the  same  file  may  or  may  not  travel  through  the  same  path.  If  there  is 

congestion at some path, packets are allowed to choose different paths possible over an existing 

network.  

Packet-Switched  networks  were  designed  to  overcome  the weaknesses of  Circuit-Switched 

networks since circuit-switched networks were not very effective for small messages. 

Advantage of Packet Switching over Circuit Switching: 

  More efficient in terms of bandwidth, since the concept of reserving circuit is not there. 

  Minimal transmission latency. 

  More reliable as a destination can detect the missing packet. 

  More fault tolerant because packets may follow a different path in case any link is down, 

Unlike Circuit Switching. 

  Cost-effective and comparatively cheaper to implement. 

The disadvantage of Packet Switching over Circuit Switching :   

  Packet Switching doesn’t give packets in order, whereas Circuit Switching provides ordered 

delivery of packets because all the packets follow the same path. 

  Since the packets are unordered, we need to provide sequence numbers for each packet. 

  Complexity is more at each node because of the facility to follow multiple paths. 

  Transmission delay is more because of rerouting. 

  Packet Switching is beneficial only for small messages, but for bursty data (large messages) 

Circuit Switching is better. 

Modes of Packet Switching :  

1. Connection-oriented Packet Switching (Virtual Circuit) :  

145 

 
 
 
  
Before  starting  the  transmission,  it  establishes  a  logical  path  or  virtual  connection  using 

signaling protocol, between sender and receiver and all packets belongs to this flow will follow 

this predefined route. Virtual Circuit ID is provided by switches/routers to uniquely identify this 

virtual connection. Data is divided into small units and all these small units are appended with 

help of sequence numbers. Overall, three phases take place here- The setup, data transfer and 

tear down phase.  

All  address  information  is  only  transferred  during  the  setup  phase.  Once  the  route  to  a 

destination is discovered, entry is added to the switching table of each intermediate node. During 

data transfer, packet header (local header) may contain information such as length, timestamp, 

sequence number, etc.  

146 

 
 
 
 
 
Connection-oriented switching is very useful in switched WAN. Some popular protocols which 

use  the  Virtual Circuit Switching  approach  are X.25,  Frame-Relay,  ATM,  and  MPLS(Multi-

Protocol Label Switching). 

Connectionless Packet Switching (Datagram): 

Unlike Connection-oriented packet switching, In Connectionless Packet Switching each packet 

contains all necessary addressing information such as source address, destination address and 

port numbers, etc. In Datagram Packet Switching, each packet is treated independently. Packets 

belonging  to  one  flow  may  take  different  routes  because  routing  decisions  are  made 

dynamically, so the packets arrived at the destination might be out of order. It has no connection 

setup 

and 

teardown 

phase, 

like 

Virtual 

Circuits.  

Packet delivery is not guaranteed in connectionless packet switching, so reliable delivery must 

be provided by end systems using additional protocols.  

A---R1---R2---B 

A is the sender (start) 

R1, R2 are two routers that store and forward data 

B is receiver(destination) 

Delays in Packet switching : 

1.  Transmission Delay 

2.  Propagation Delay 

147 

 
 
 
 
 
3.  Queuing Delay 

4.  Processing Delay 

11.3  NETWORK SERVICES AND INTERNAL NETWORK OPERATION                                 

The essential function of a network is to transfer information among the users that are attached to 

the network or internetwork. In Figure 7.1 we show that this transfer may involve a single block of 

information or a sequence of blocks that are temporally related. In the case of a single block of 

information, we are interested in having the block delivered correctly to the destination, and we 

may also be interested in the delay experienced in traversing the network. In the case of a sequence 

of blocks, we may be interested not only in receiving the blocks correctly and in the right sequence 

but also in delivering a relatively unimpaired temporal relation. 

Figure 7.2 shows a transport protocol that operates end to end across a network. The transport layer 

peer processes at the end systems accept messages from their higher layer and transfer these messages 

by exchanging segments end to end across the network. The figure shows the interface at which the 

network service is visible to the transport layer. The network service is all that matters to the transport 

layer, and the manner in which the network operates to provide the service is irrelevant. 

The network service can be connection-oriented or connectionless. A connectionless service is very 

simple, with only two basic interactions between the transport layer and the network layer: a request 

to the network that it send a packet and an indication from the network that a packet has arrived. 

The user can request transmission of a packet at any time, and does not need to inform the   network 

layer that the user intends to transmit information ahead of time. A connectionless service puts total 

responsibility for error control, sequencing, and flow control on the end-system transport layer. 

The  network  service  can  be  connection-oriented.  In  this  case  the  transport layer  cannot  request 

transmission of information until a connection has been set up. The essential points here are that the 

network layer must be informed about  the new flow that is about to be applied to the network and 

that the network layer maintains state information about the flows it is handling. During call setup, 

parameters related to usage and quality of service may be negotiated and network resources may 

be allocated to ensure that the user flow can be handled as required. A connection-release procedure 

may  also  be  required  to terminate the connection. It is clear that providing connection-oriented 

service entails greater complexity than connectionless service in the network layer. 

It is also possible for a network layer to provide a choice of services to the user of the network. 

For  example,  the  network  layer  could  offer:  (1)  best-effort connectionless  service;  (2)  low-delay 

connectionless  service;  (3)  connection- oriented  reliable stream  service;  and  (4)  connection-oriented 

transfer of packets with delay and bandwidth guarantees. It is easy to come up with examples of 

applications  that  can  make  use  of  each  of  these  services.  However,  it  does  not  follow  that  all  the 

148 

 
 
services  should  be  offered  by  the  network  layer.  Two  inter-  related  reasons  can  be  given  for 

keeping the set of network services to a mini- mum:  the  end-to-end  argument  and  the  need  for 

network scalability. 

When applied to the issue of choice of network services, the end-to-end argument  suggests  that 

functions  should  be  placed  as  close  to  the  application as possible, since it is the application that is 

in the best position to determine whether a function is being carried out completely and correctly. 

This argument suggests that as much functionality as possible should be located in the transport layer 

or higher and that the network services should provide the minimum functionality  required  to 

meet application performance. 

Up  to  this  point  we  have  considered  only  the  services  offered  by  the  network  layer.  Let  us  now 

consider the internal operation of the network. Figure 7.3 shows the relation between the service 

offered by the network and the internal operation. We say that the internal operation of a network 

is connectionless if packets are transferred within the network as datagrams. Thus in the figure each 

packet is routed independently. Consequently packets may follow different paths from  α to  β and  so 

may  arrive  out  of  order.  We  say  that  the  internal  operation  of a  network  is  connection-oriented  if 

packets follow virtual circuits that have been 

established  from  a  source  to  a  destination.  Thus  to  provide  communications  between α and β, 

routing to set up a virtual circuit is done once, and thereafter packets are simply forwarded along 

the established path. If resources are reserved during connection setup, then bandwidth, delay, and 

loss guarantees can be provided. 

The fact that a network offers connection-oriented service, connectionless service, or both does not 

dictate how the network must operate internally. In discussing TCP and IP, we have already seen 

that a connectionless packet net- work (e.g., IP) can support connectionless service (UDP) as well as 

connection- oriented service (TCP). We will also see that a connection-oriented network (e.g., ATM) 

can provide connectionless service as well as connection-oriented service. We discuss virtual-circuit 

and  datagram  network  operation  in  more  detail  in  a  later  section.  However,  it  is  worthwhile  to 

compare the two at this point at a high level. 

The approach suggested by the end-to-end argument keeps the network service (and the network layer 

that provides the service) as simple as possible while adding complexity at the edge only as required. 

This strategy fits very well with the need to grow networks to very large scale. We have seen that the 

value of a network grows with the community of users that can be reached and with the range of 

applications that can be supported. Heaping the core of the network simple and adding the necessary 

complexity at the edge enhances the scalability of the network to larger size and scope. 

This reasoning suggests a preference for a connectionless network, which has much lower complexity 

than  a  connection-oriented  network.  The  reasoning  does  allow the possibility for some degree of 

‘‘connection orientation‘‘ as a means to ensure that applications can receive the proper level of 

149 

 
performance.  Indeed  current  research  and  standardization  efforts  (discussed  in  Chapter  10)  can  be 

viewed  as  an  attempt  in  this  direction  to  determine  an  appropriate  set  of  network  services  and  an 

appropriate mode of internal network operation. 

We have concentrated on high-level arguments up to this point. What do these arguments imply 

about the functions that should be in the network layer? Clearly, functions that need to be carried 

out at every node in the network must be in the network layer. Thus functions that route and forward 

packets need to be done in the network layer. Priority and scheduling functions that direct how 

packets  are  forwarded  so  that  quality  of  service  is  provided  also  need  to  be  in  the network  layer. 

Functions that belong in the edge should, if possible, be imple mented in the transport layer or 

higher. A third category of functions can be implemented either at the edge or inside the network. 

For example, while con gestion takes place inside the network, the remedy involves reducing input 

flows at the edge of the network. We will see that congestion control has been implemented in the 

transport layer and in the network layer. 

Another  set  of  functions  is  concerned  with  making  the  network  service  independent  of  the 

underlying transmission systems. For example,  different 

transmissions systems (e.g., optical versus wireless) may have different limits on the frame size they 

can handle. The network  layer may therefore be called upon to  carry out segmentation inside the 

network and reasssembly at the edge. Alternatively, the network could send error messages to the 

sending edge, requesting that the packet size be reduced. A more challenging set of functions arises 

when the ‘‘network‘‘ itself may actually be an internetwork. In this case the network layer must also 

be  concerned not  only  about  differences  in  the  size  of  the units  that  the  component  networks  can 

transfer but also about differences in addressing and in the services that the component networks 

provide.  

11.6  SUMMARY 

At  the  end  of  this  unit  we  have  learnt  packet  switching  networks  in  that  we  gone  through 

advantages and disadvantages of packet switching networks and also modes of packet switching. 

In the last section of this unit we have discussed network services and internal network operations. 

11.7    KEYWORDS 

Packet switching, Packet, Congestion, virtual circuit and datagram 

11.8     QUESTIONS 

1.  Describe packet switching networks. 

2.  With neat diagram explain connection-oriented packet switching. 

3.  Write the advantages and disadvantages of packet switching. 

4.  Briefly Explain network services. 

150 

 
 
5.  Discuss internal network operations. 

11.9    REFERENCE 

 

Introduction to Data Communications and Networking by Behrouz Forouzan.  

  Computer Networks by Andrew S Tanenbaum. 

  Networking Essentials – Third Edition – Jeffrey S. Beasley, Piyasat Nilkaew 

UNIT – 12: PACKET NETWORK TOPOLOGY 

Structure  

12.0 Objectives 

12.1 Introduction 

12.2 Packet network topology  

12.3 Datagrams and Virtual circuits 

12.4 Connectionless packet switching 

12.5 Summary 

12.6 Keywords 

12.7 Questions 

12.8 Reference 

12.0   OBJECTIVES 

At the end of this unit you will be able to 

  Describe Packet network topology 

  Elucidate Datagrams and Virtual circuits 

  Discuss Connectionless packet switching 

151 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.1 

INTRODUCTION 

This topology comprises multiple domains consisting of routers interconnected by point-to-point 

data links, LANs, and wide area networks such as ATM. The principal task of a packet-switching 

network is to provide connectivity among users. 

12. 2  PACKET NETWORK TOPOLOGY 

This section considers existing packet-switching networks. We present an end-to- end view of existing 

networks from a personal computer, workstation, or server through  LANs  and  the  Internet  and 

back. 

First  let  us  consider  the  way  in  which  users  access  packet  networks.  Figure12.1  shows  an  access 

multiplexer where the packets from a number of users share a transmission line. This system arises for 

example, in X.25, frame relay, and ATM networks, where a single transmission line is shared in the 

access to a wide area packet-switching network. The multiplexer combines the typically burst flows 

of the individual computers into aggregated flows that make efficient use of the transmission line. 

Note that different applications within a single computer can generate multiple simultaneous flows 

to different destinations. From a logical point of view, the link can be viewed as carrying either a 

single aggregated flow or a number of separate packet flows. The network access node forwards packets 

into a backbone packet network. 

Fig12.1 : Access Multiplexer 

Local area networks (LANs) provide the access to packet-switching networks in many environments. 

As shown in Figure 12.2a, computers are connected to a shared transmission medium. Transmissions 

are  broadcast  to  all  computers  in  the  network. Each computer is identified by  a unique physical 

address, and so each station listens for its address to receive transmissions. Broadcast and multi- cast 

transmissions are easily provided in this environment. 

152 

 
 
 
 
 
 
LANs  allow  the  sharing  of  resources  such  as  printers,  databases,  and  soft-  ware  among  a  small 

community of users. LANs can be extended through the use of bridges or LAN switches, as shown in 

Figure 12.2b. Here the LAN switch forwards inter-LAN traffic based on the physical address of 

the  frames. Traffic local to each LAN stays local, and broadcast transmissions are forwarded to the 

other attached LANs. Switches can interconnect more than two LANs. 

Multiple  LANs  in  an  organization,  in  turn,  are  interconnected  into  campus  networks  with  a 

structure such as that shown in Figure 7.б. LANs for a large group of users such as a department 

are interconnected in an extended LAN through the use of LAN switches, identified by lowercase 

s in the figure. Resources such as servers and databases that are primarily of use to this depart ment are 

kept within the subnetwork. This approach reduces delays in accessing the resources and contains the 

level of traffic that leaves the subnetwork. Each subnetwork has access to the rest of the organization 

through a router R that accesses the campus backbone network. A subnetwork also uses the campus 

backbone to reach the ‘‘outside world‘‘ such as the Internet or other sites belonging to the organization 

through  a  gateway  router.  Depending  on  the  type  of  organization,  the  gateway  may  implement 

firewall functions to control the traffic that is allowed into and out of the campus network. 

Servers containing critical resources that are required by the entire organization are usually located in 

a data center where they can be easily maintained and where security can be enforced. As shown in 

Figure  12.3,  the  critical  servers  may  be  provided  with  redundant  paths  to  the  campus  backbone 

network. These servers  are  usually  placed  near  the  backbone  network  to  minimize  the  number of 

hops required to access them from the rest of the organization. 

Fig:12.2  Local area networks 

153 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig:12.3 Campus networks 

The traffic within an extended LAN is delivered based on the physical LAN addresses. However, 

applications in host computers operate on the basis of logical IP addresses. Therefore, the physical 

address  corresponding  to  an  IP  address  needs to  be determined every time an  IP packet  is  to  be 

transmitted over a LAN. This address resolution problem can be solved by using IP address to physical 

address translation tables. In the next chapter we discuss the Address Resolution Protocol that IP uses 

to solve this problem. 

The  routers  in  the  campus  network  are  interconnected  to  form  the  campus backbone  network, 

depicted by the mesh of switches, designated S, in Figure 12.3. Typically, for large organizations such 

as  universities  these  routers  are  interconnected  by  using  very  high  speed  LANs,  for  example, 

Gigabit Ethernet or an ATM network. The routers use the Internet Protocol (IP), which enables them 

to operate over various data link and network technologies. The routers exchange information about 

the  state  of  their  links  to  dynamically  calculate  routing  tables that  direct  packets  across  the 

campus network. This approach allows the net- work to adapt to changes in traffic pattern as well 

as changes in topology due to faults in equipment. 

The routers in the campus network form a domain or autonomous system. The term domain indicates 

that the routers run the same routing protocol. The term autonomous system is used for one or more 

domains  under  a  single  administration.  All  routing  decisions  inside  the  autonomous  system  are 

154 

 
 
 
 
independent of any other network. 

Organizations with multiple sites may have their various campus networks interconnected through 

routers  interconnected  by  leased  digital  transmission  lines  or  frame  relay  connections.  In  this  case 

access to the wide area network may use an access multiplexer such as the one shown in Figure 7.4. In 

addition the campus network may be connected to an Internet service provider through one or more 

border  routers  as  shown  in  Figure  12.4. To  communicate  with  other networks,  the  autonomous 

system must provide information about its network routes in the border routers. The border router 

communicates on an interdomain level, whereas other routers in a campus network operate at the 

intradomain level. 

A national ISP provides points of presence (POPs) in various cities where customers can connect 

to their network. The ISP has its own national network for interconnecting its POPs. This network 

could  be  based  on  ATM;  it  might  use  IP  over  SONET;  or  it  might  use  some  other  network 

technology. The ISPs in turn exchange traffic as network access points (NAPs), as shown in Figure 

12.5   

Fig12.4: Intradomain and interdomain levels 

155 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig12.5:  National  ISPs  exchange  traffic  at  NAPs;  Routing  information  is  exchanged  through  route 

servers 

 A NAP is a high-speed LAN or switch at which the routers from  different ISPs can  exchange 

traffic,  and  as  such  NAPs  are  crucial  to  the  interconnectivity provided by the Internet. (As 

discussed in Chapter 1, four NAPs were originally set up by the National Science Foundation). The 

(  —  
) 

ISPs interconnected to a NAP need to exchange routing information. If there are n such ISPs, then 

n n 

1 pairwise route exchanges are required. This problem is solved by introducing a route server 

as shown  in Figure  7.8b.  Each  ISP  sends routing  information  to  the route server,  which knows the 

policies of every  ISP. The route server in turn delivers the processed routing information to the 

ISPs.  Note  that  a  national  service  provider  also  has  the  capability  of  interconnecting  a  customer‘s 

various sites by using its own IP network, so the customer‘s sites appear as a single private network. 

This configuration is an example of a virtual private network (VPN). Small office and home (SOHO) 

users obtain packet access through ISPs. The access is typically through modem dial-up, but it could 

be through ADSL, ISDN, or cable modem. When a customer connects to an ISP, the customer is 

assigned an IP address for the duration of the connection.1 Addresses are shared in this way because the 

ISP has only a limited number of addresses. If the ISP is only a local provider, then it must connect to 

a regional or national provider and eventually to a NAP. Thus we see that a multilevel hierarchical 

network  topology  arises  for  the  Internet  which  is  much  more  decentralized  than  traditional 

telephone networks. This  topology  comprises  multiple  domains  consisting  of  routers  interconnected 

156 

 
 
 
 
by point-to-point data links, LANs, and wide area networks such as ATM. 

The  principal  task  of  a  packet-switching  network  is  to  provide  connectivity among  users.  The 

preceding description of the existing packet-switching network infrastructure reveals the magnitude of 

this  task.  Routers  exchange  information  among  themselves  and  use  routing  protocols  to  build  a 

consistent set of routing tables that can be used in the routes to direct the traffic flows in these networks. 

The routing protocols must adapt to changes in network topology due to the introduction of new 

nodes and links or to failures in equipment. Different routing algorithms are used within a domain 

and between domains. A key concern here is that the routing tables result in stable traffic flows that 

make  efficient  use of  network  resources.  Another  concern  is  to  keep  the  size  of  routing  tables 

manageable even as the size of the network continues to grow at a rapid pace. In this chapter we show 

how hierarchical addressing structures can help address this problem. A third concern is to deal with 

congestion that inevitably occurs in the network. It makes no sense to accept packets into the network 

when they are likely to be discarded. Thus when congestion occurs inside the network, that is, buffers 

begin filling up as a result of a surge in traffic or a fault in equipment, the network should react by 

applying  congestion  control  to  limit  access  to  the  net- work  only  to  traffic  that  is  likely  to  be 

delivered. A final concern involves providing the capability to offer Quality-of-Service guarantees to 

some packet flows. We deal with these topics also in the remainder of the chapter  

12.3 

DATAGRAMS AND VIRTUAL CIRCUITS 

 A network is usually represented as a cloud with multiple input sources and output destinations 

as shown in Figure 12.6. A network can be viewed as a generalization of a physical cable in the 

sense of providing connectivity between multiple users.  

Fig 12.6: Switched networks 

Unlike  a  cable,  a  switched  network  is  geographically  distributed and  consists  of  a  graph  of 

transmission lines (i.e., links) interconnected by switches (nodes). These transmission and switching 

resources are configured to enable the flow of information among users. Networks provide for the 

interconnection of sources to destinations on a dynamic basis. Resources are typically allocated to 

an  information  flow  only  when  needed.  In  this  manner  the  resources  are  shared  among  the 

157 

 
 
 
community of users resulting in efficiency and lower costs. There are two fundamental approaches 

to transferring information over a packet-switched network. The first approach, called connection-

oriented, involves setting up a connection across the network before information can be transferred. The 

setup procedure typically involves the exchange of signaling messages and the allocation of resources along 

the path from the input to the output for the duration of the connection. The second approach is 

connectionless and does not involve a prior allocation of resources. Instead a packet of information 

is  routed  independently  from  switch to  switch  until  the  packet  arrives  at  its  destination.  Both 

approaches involve the use of switches or routers to direct packets across the network. 

Structure of Switch†Router 

Figure shows a generic switch consisting of input ports, output ports, an interconnection fabric, and 

a  switch  controller/processor.  Input  ports  and  output  ports  are  usually  paired.  A  line  card  typically 

handles several input/output ports. The line card implements physical and data link layer functions. 

Thus  the card  is  concerned  with  symbol  timing  and  line coding.  It  is  also  concerned  with  framing, 

physical  layer  addressing,  and  error  checking.  For  widely  deployed  standards, the line card also 

implements medium access control and data link protocols in hardware with a special-purpose chip 

set.  The  line  card  also  contains  some  buffering  to  handle  the  speed  mismatch  between  the 

transmission line and the interconnection fabric. The controller/processor can carry out a number of 

functions depending on the type of packet switching. The function of the interconnection fabric is 

to transfer packets between the line cards. Note that Figure 12.7 shows an ‘‘unfolded‘‘ version of the 

switch in which the line cards appear twice, once with input ports and again with output ports. In 

the  actual  implementation the  transmit  and  receive  functions  take  place  in  a  single  line  card. 

However, the function of various types of switch architectures is easier to visualize this way. 

We elaborate on the operation of the switches as we develop the two approaches to packet switching. 

A simple switch can be built by using a personal computer or a workstation and inserting several 

network interface cards (NICs) in the expansion slots as  shown in Figure 12.8.  

158 

 
 
 
 
Fig12.7: Components of generic switch/router 

The frames that arrive at the NICs are de-encapsulated, and the packets are transferred by using 

the I/O bus from the NIC to main memory. The processor performs the required routing and protocol 

processing,  formats the packet header, and then forwards the packet by transferring it from main 

memory to the appropriate NIC. 

The simple setup in Figure 12.9 reveals the three basic resources and poten tial bottlenecks in switches: 

processing, memory, and bus (interconnection) bandwidth. Processing is required to implement 

the protocols, and hence the processing capacity places a limit on the maximum rate at which the 

switch  can  operate.  Memory  is  required  to  store  packets,  and  hence  the  amount  of  memory 

available determines the rate at which packets are lost, thus placing another limit on the load at 

which the switch can be operated. 

Fig12.8: Building a switch from a general purpose computer 

Figure12.9: shows that the flows that enter the switch in effect are demultiplexed at the input port 

 In this approach  the memory bandwidth, which is the rate at which information can be read in 

and  out  of  RAM,  also  places  a  limit  on  the  aggregate  rate  of  the  switch.  Finally, the  I/O  bus 

bandwidth places a limit on the total rate at which information can be transferred between ports. 

Different switch architectures configure these basic resources so that target aggregate switch capacities 

are met in a cost-effective manner. 

159 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Each input and output port in a  switch/router typically  contains multiplexed streams  of  packets. 

Figure shows that the flows that enter the switch in effect are demultiplexed at the input port. The switch 

or router then directs the packets to output ports. Each output port can be viewed as a multiplexer 

that precedes the outgoing transmission line. Thus we see that switches and routers play a key role in 

controlling where the packet flows are placed in a network. By controlling packet flows, the network 

bandwidth can be used efficiently and the performacne can be optimized. We return to this discussion 

when we discuss Quality-of- Service mechanisms later in the chapter. 

Computer networks that provide connection-oriented services are called Virtual Circuits while 

those providing connection-less services are called Datagram networks. For prior knowledge, 

the  Internet  which  we  use  is  actually  based  on  a  Datagram  network  (connection-less)  at  the 

network  level  as  all  packets  from  a  source  to  a  destination  do  not  follow  the  same  path.  

Let us see what are the highlighting differences between these two hot debated topics here:   

Virtual Circuits:  

1.  It is connection-oriented, meaning that there is a reservation of resources like buffers, CPU, 

bandwidth,  etc.  for  the  time  in  which  the  newly  setup  VC  is  going  to  be  used  by  a  data 

transfer session. 

2.  The first sent packet reserves resources at each server along the path. Subsequent packets 

will follow the same path as the first sent packet for the connection time. 

3.  Since all the packets are going to follow the same path, a global header is required. Only the 

first packet of the connection requires a global header, the remaining packets generally don’t 

require global headers. 

4.  Since all packets follow a specific path, packets are received in order at the destination. 

5.  Virtual  Circuit  Switching  ensures  that  all  packets  successfully  reach  the  Destination.  No 

packet will be discarded due to the unavailability of resources. 

6.  From the above points, it can be concluded that Virtual Circuits are a highly reliable method 

of data transfer. 

7.  The issue with virtual circuits is that each time a new connection is set up, resources and 

extra  information  have  to  be  reserved  at  every  router  along  the  path,  which  becomes 

problematic if many clients are trying to reserve a router’s resources simultaneously.  

8.  It is used by the ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode) Network, specifically for Telephone 

calls. 

Datagram:  

1.  It is a connection-less service. There is no need for reservation of resources as there is no 

dedicated path for a connection session. 

160 

 
 
2.  All  packets  are  free  to  use  any  available  path.  As  a  result,  intermediate  routers  calculate 

routes on the go due to dynamically changing routing tables on routers. 

3.  Since every packet is free to choose any path, all packets must be associated with a header 

with proper information about the source and the upper layer data. 

4.  The connection-less property makes data packets reach the destination in any order, which 

means that they can potentially be received out of order at the receiver’s end. 

5.  Datagram networks are not as reliable as Virtual Circuits. 

6.  The major drawback of Datagram Packet switching is that a packet can only be forwarded if 

resources such as the buffer, CPU, and bandwidth are available. Otherwise, the packet will 

be discarded. 

7.  But it is always easy and cost-efficient to implement datagram networks as there is no extra 

headache  of  reserving  resources  and  making  a  dedicated  each  time  an  application  has  to 

communicate. 

8.  It is generally used by the IP network, which is used for Data services like the Internet. 

12.4 

CONNECTIONLESS  PACKET  SWITCHING 

Packet switching has its origin in message switching, where a message is relayed from one station to 

another until the message arrives at its destination. At the source each message has a header attached 

to it to  provide source and destina-  tion addresses. CRC checkbits are attached to detect errors. As 

shown  in  Figure  12.10,  the  message  is  transmitted  in  a  store-and-forward  fashion.  The  message  is 

transmitted in its entirety from one switch to the next switch. Each switch per- forms an error check, 

and if no errors are found, the switch examines the header to determine the next hop in the path to the 

destination. If errors are detected, a retransmission may be requested. After the next hop is determined, 

the  message  waits  for  transmission  over  the  corresponding  transmission  link.  Because  the 

transmission links are shared, the message may have to wait until previously queued messages are 

transmitted. Message switching does not involve a call setup. Message switching can achieve a high 

utilization of the transmission line. This increased utilization is achieved at the expense of queueing 

delays. Loss of messages may occur when a switch has insufficient buffering to store the arriving 

message. End-to-end mechanisms are required to recover from these losses. 

161 

 
 
 
Fig12.10: Message Switching 

Fig12.11: Delays in message switching 

+ 

Figure 12.11 shows the total delay that is incurred when a message is trans- mitted over a path that 

involves two intermediate switches. The message must first traverse the link that connects the source 

to the first switch. We assume that this link has a propagation delay of p seconds.3 We also assume that 

the message has a transmission time of T seconds. The message must next traverse the link connecting 

the  two  switches,  and  then  it  must  traverse  the  link  connecting the  second  switch  and  the 

destination. For simplicity we assume that the propagation delay and the bit rate of the transmission 

lines are the same. It then follows that the minimum end-to-end messge delay is 3p 3T. Note that 

this delay does not take into account any queueing delays that may be incurred in the various links 

waiting for prior messages to be transmitted. It also does not take into account the times required 

to perform the error checks or any associated retransmissions. 

Example—Long Messages rersus Packets 

Suppose that we wish to transmit a large message (L  10б  bits) over two hops. Suppose  that  the 

= 

transmission line in each hop has an error rate of p 10—б and that each hop does error checking and 

= 

retransmission. How many bits need to be transmitted using message switching? 

If we transmit the message in its entirety, the probability that the message arrives 

correctly after the first hop is 

Pc = (1 — p)L  = (1 — 10—б)1000000  ≈ e—Lp = e—1 ≈ 1/3 

162 

 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, on the average it will take three tries to get the message over the first hop. Similarly, the 

second hop will require another three full message trans- missions on the average. Thus б Mbits will 

need to be transmitted to get the 1 Mbit message across. 

Now suppose that the message is broken up into ten 105-bit packets. The probability that a packet 

arrives correctly after the first hop is 

Pr

c  = (1 — 10—б)100000  ≈ e—1/10  ≈ 0.90 

Thus  each  packet  needs  to  be  transmitted  1/0.90  =  1.1  times  on  the  average. The  message  gets 

transmitted over each hop by transmitting an average of 

1.1 Mbit.  The  total  number  of  bits  transmitted  over  the  two  hops  is  then 

2.2 Mbits. 

The preceding example reiterates our observation on ARQ protocols that the probability of error in a 

transmitted block increases with the length of the block. Thus very long messages are not desirable 

if the transmission lines are noisy because they lead to a larger rate of message retransmissions. This 

situation is one reason that it is desirable to place a limit on the maximum size of the blocks that can 

be  transmitted  by  the  network.  Thus  long  messages  should  be  broken into  smaller  blocks  of 

information, or packets. 

Message switching is also not suitable for interactive applications because it allows the transmission 

of  very  long  messages  that  can  impose  very  long  waiting  delays  on  other  messages.  By  placing  a 

maximum length on the size of the blocks that are transmitted, packet switching limits the maximum 

delay that can be imposed by a single packet on other packets. Thus packet switching is more 

suitable than message switching for interactive applications. 

In  the  datagram,  or  connectionless  packet-switching  approach,  each  packet  is routed  independently 

through the network. Each packet has an attached header that provides all of the information required 

to route the packet to its destination. When a packet arrives at a packet switch, the destination 

address (and possibly other fields) in the header are examined to determine the next hop in the path 

to  the  destination.  The  packet  is  then  placed  in  a  queue  to  wait  until  the  given  transmission  line 

becomes available. By sharing the transmission line among multiple packets, packet switching 

can achieve high utilization at the expense of packet queueing delays. We note that routers in the 

Internet are packet switches that operate in datagram mode. 

Because each packet is routed independently, packets from the same source to the same destination 

may traverse different paths through the network as shown in Figure 7.15. For example, the routes 

may change in response to a network fault. Thus packets may arrive out of order, and resequencing 

may be required at the destination. 

163 

 
 
Fig12.12: Datagram packet switching 

Fig12.13: Delays in packet switching  

Figure 12.13 shows the delay that is incurred by transmitting a message that is broken into three separate 

packets. Here we assume that the three packets follow the same path and are transmitted in succession. 

= 

We neglect the overhead due to headers and suppose that each packet requires P  T/3 seconds to transmit. 

The three packets are transmitted successively from the source to the first packet switch. 

The first packet in Figure 12.13 arrives at the first switch after p P seconds. Assuming that the packet 

+ 

arrives correctly, it can begin transmission over the next hop after a brief processing time. The first 

packet is received at the second packet switch at time 2p 2P. Again we assume that the packet begins 

+ 

transmis- sion over the final hop after a brief processing time. The first packet then arrives at the final 

+ 

link  at  time  3p  3P.  As  the  first  packet  traverses  the  network,  the  subsequent  packets  follow 

+  +  =  +  =  +

immediately, as shown in the figure. In the absence of transmission  errors,  the  final  packet  will 

+ 

arrive  at  the  destination  at  time 3p   3P   2P     3p    5P     3p    T     2P,  which  is  less  than  the 

delay  incurred in the message switching example in Figure 7.14. In general, if the path followed by a 

sequence of packets consists of L hops with identical propagation delays and transmission speeds, 

then the total delay incurred by a message that consists of k packets is given by 

164 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lp + LP + (k — 1)P 

In contrast, the delay incurred using message switching is 

Lp + LT = Lp + L(kP) 

Thus message switching involves an additional delay of L 1 k 1 P. We note that the above delays 

(   —   )(  
—   ) 

neglect the queueing and processing times at the various hops in the network. 

Figure 12.14 shows a routing table that contains an entry for each possible destination for a small 

network. This entry specifies the next hop that is to be taken by packets with the given destination. 

When a packet arrives, the destina- tion address in the header is used to perform a table lookup. The 

result of the lookup is the number of the output port to which the packet must be forwarded. 

When  the size  of  the network  becomes  very  large,  this  simple table lookup  is  not  feasible,  and  the 

switch/router processor needs to execute a route lookup algo- rithm for each arriving packet. 

In datagram packet switching, the packet switches have no knowledge of a ‘‘connection‘‘ even when 

a  source  and  destination  exchange  a  sequence  of  pack- ets.  This  feature  makes  datagram  packet 

switching  robust  with  respect  to  faults in  the  network.  If  a  link  or  packet  switch  fails,  the 

neighboring packet switches react by routing packets along different links and by sharing the fault 

informa- tion with other switches. This process results in the setting up of a new set of routing 

tables.  Because  no  connections  are  set  up,  the  sources  and  destinations  need  not  be  aware  of  the 

occurrence  of  a  failure  in  the  network.  The  processors  in the  switch/routers  execute  a  distributed 

algorithm for sharing network state information and for synthesizing routing tables. 

Fig12.14: Routing table 

The design of the routing table is a key issue in the proper operation of a packet-switching network. 

This design requires knowledge about the topology of the network as well as of the levels of traffic 

in various parts of the network. Another issue is that the size of the tables can become very large as 

the size of the network increases. We discuss these issues further later in the chapter. 

165 

 
 
 
 
IP Internetworks 

The Internet Protocol provides for the connectionless transfer of packets across an interconnected set 

of networks called an internet. In general the component networks may use different protocols so 

the objective of IP is to provide com- munications across these dissimilar networks. Each device that 

is attached to an IP internet has a two-part address: a network part and a host part. To transmit an 

IP packet, a device sends an IP packet encapsulated using its local network protocol to the nearest 

router. The routers are packet switches that act as gate- ways between the component networks. The 

router performs a route lookup algorithm  on  the  network  part  of  the  destination  address  of  the 

packet  to  determine whether  the destination  is  in  an  immediately  accessible  network  or,  if  not, to 

determine the next router in the path to the destination. The router then forwards the IP packet across 

the given network by encapsulating the IP packet using the format and protocol of the given network. 

In other words, IP treats the component networks as data link layers whose role is to transfer the 

packet to the next router or to the destination. IP packets are routed in connectionless fashion from 

router to router until the destination is reached. 

12.5  SUMMARY 

In this unit we have discussed about packet network topology in detail. Here we also explained in 

detail datagrams and virtual circuits. At the end of this unit in detail discussed about connectionless 

packet switching. 

12.6  KEYWORDS 

LAN, Virtual circuit, Datagram, Internet protocol. 

12.7  QUESTIONS 

1.  Briefly explain packet network topology. 

2.  Write a short note on datagram. 

3.  Differentiate virtual circuit and datagram. 

4.  With neat diagram explain connectionless packet switching 

5.  Discuss IP  Internetworks 

12.8  REFERENCES 

 

Introduction to Data Communications and Networking by Behrouz Forouzan.  

  Computer Networks by Andrew S Tanenbaum. 

  Networking Essentials – Third Edition – Jeffrey S. Beasley, Piyasat Nilkaew 

166 

 
 
 
 
 
 
VIRTUAL CIRCUIT PACKET SWITCHING AND ROUTING CONCEPTS 

UNIT-13 

Structure: 

13.0 Objectives 

13.1 Introduction 

13.2 Virtual circuit packet switching 

13.3 Routing concepts 

13.4 Routing tables 

13.5 Summary 

13.6 Keywords 

13.7 Questions for self study 

13.8 References 

13.0 OBJECTIVES 

After studying this unit, you will be able to 

  Explain virtual circuit packet switching 

  Describe routing concepts  

  Elucidate routing tables 

 13.1 INTRODUCTION 

Packet Switched service transfers the data from source to destination. Data is transferred on a 

type  of  network  in  which  small  units  of  data  called  packets  are  transferred.  Each  packet 

contains a destination address within it, where it has to be received. 

This  type  of  communication  between  receiver  &  sender  is  connectionless.  The  internet  is 

also  a  connectionless  network.  Most  of  the  traffic  over  the  internet  uses  packet  switched 

service. 

Voice call over the internet is a type of packet switching, where each end of the conversation 

is  divided  into  small  packets  &  is  reassembled  later  into  a  complete  message.  Packets  are 

made up of a header and a payload, header directs it to the destination & data in the payload 

is the actual data which is to be transferred. 

13.2 VIRTUAL CIRCUIT PACKET SWITCHING 

The packet switching network is of two types − 

  Datagram packet switching 

  Virtual circuit packet switching 

167 

 
The packet switching network is diagrammatically represented as follows − 

Virtual circuit switching 

It is a network where a virtual connection is established between source and the destination. 

Through  this  network,  packets  will  be  transferred  during  any  call.  The  path  established 

between two points  appears as  a dedicated physical  circuit. Therefore, it  is  called a virtual 

circuit. It is a type of packet switching. 

It is a connection-oriented service, where the first packet goes and reserves the resources for 

the subsequent packets. For examples − X.25 and frame relay. 

Virtual  Circuit  packet  switching  involves  the  establishment  of  a  fixed  path,  often  called  a 

virtual  circuit or  a connection. There  are setup  and teardown phases in  addition  to  the data 

transfer  phase.  Resources  can  be  allocated  during  the  setup  phase.  Data  are  packetized  and 

each  packet  carries  an  address  in  the  header.  However,  the  address  in  the  header  has  local 

jurisdiction (it defines what should be the next switch and the channel on which the packet is 

being canied), not end-to-end jurisdiction. The reader may ask how the intermediate switches 

know where to send the packet if there is no final destination address carried by a packet. all 

packets follow the same path established during the connection. A virtual-circuit network is 

normally implemented in the data link layer. 

The pictorial representation of virtual circuit connection over a telephone call is as follows − 

168 

 
 
Let’s try to understand the concept with the help of data flow diagram as shown below − 

Explanation: 

Step 1 − Sender A establishes a call request connection to connect with the receiver. 

Step 2 − Receiver B establishes a call accepting connection to connect with sender. 

Step 3 − Data will be transferred whenever the router is established. 

Step 4 − Node 1 and Node 2 are intermediate nodes between sender and receiver, the data 

will be transferred by connecting two nodes virtually. 

Step 5 − after transmitting the data, an ACK will be sent by the receiver by saying a message 

is received. 

Step 6 − A clear signal will be sent if the user wants to terminate the connection. 

Advantages: 

The advantages of virtual circuit are as follows − 

169 

 
 
 
  Packets are delivered in the same order as they all follow the same route between the 

source & the destination. 

  The  overhead  is  smaller  as  full  address  is  not  required  on  each  packet  as  they  all 

follow the same established path. 

  The connection is more reliable as it is one to one connection. 

  Less chances of data loss. 

Disadvantages: 

The disadvantages of virtual circuit are as follows − 

  The switching equipment should be powerful. 

  Re-establishment of the network is difficult as if there is any failure. All calls need to 

be re-established. 

13.3 ROUTING CONCEPTS 

Routing 

Routing  is  the  process  of  path  selection  in  any  network.  A  computer  network  is  made  of 

many  machines,  called nodes,  and  paths  or  links  that  connect  those  nodes.  Communication 

between two nodes in an interconnected network can take place through many different paths. 

Routing is the process of selecting the best path using some predetermined rules. 

o  A Router is a process of selecting path along which the data can be transferred from 

source to the destination. Routing is performed by a special device known as a router. 

o  A Router works at the network layer in the OSI model and internet layer in TCP/IP 

model 

o  A  router  is  a  networking  device  that  forwards  the  packet  based  on  the  information 

available in the packet header and forwarding table. 

o  The  routing  algorithms  are  used  for  routing  the  packets.  The  routing  algorithm  is 

nothing but a software responsible for deciding the optimal path through which packet 

can be transmitted. 

o  The  routing  protocols  use  the  metric  to  determine  the  best  path  for  the  packet 

delivery.  The  metric  is  the  standard  of  measurement  such  as  hop  count,  bandwidth, 

delay,  current  load  on  the  path,  etc.  used  by  the  routing  algorithm  to  determine  the 

optimal path to the destination. 

o  The  routing  algorithm  initializes  and  maintains  the  routing  table  for  the  process  of 

path determination. 

170 

 
Working of Router: 

Data moves along any network in the form of data packets. Each data packet has a header that 

contains  information  about  the  packet’s  intended  destination.  As  a  packet  travels  to  its 

destination,  several  routers  might  route  it  multiple  times.  Routers  perform  this  process 

millions of times each second with millions of packets. 

When  a  data  packet  arrives,  the  router  first  looks  up  its  address  in  a  routing  table.  This  is 

similar to a passenger consulting a bus timetable to find the best bus route to their destination. 

Then the router forwards or moves the packet onward to the next point in the network. 

Types of Routing: 

There are two different types of routing, which are based on how the router creates its routing 

tables: 

Static routing 

In static routing, a network administrator uses static tables to manually configure and select 

network routes. Static routing is helpful in situations where the network design or parameters 

are expected to remain constant. Static routing is a process in which we  have to manually 

add routes to the routing table.  

The static nature of this routing technique comes with expected drawbacks, such as network 

congestion.  While  administrators  can  configure  fallback  paths  in  case  a  link  fails,  static 

routing  generally  decreases  the  adaptability  and  flexibility  of  networks,  resulting  in  limited 

network performance. 

Advantages: 

  No  routing  overhead  for  router  CPU  which  means  a  cheaper  router  can  be  used  to  do 

routing.  

 

It adds security because an only administrator can allow routing to particular networks 

only.  

  No bandwidth usage between routers.  

Disadvantage –  

  For a large network, it is a hectic task for administrators to manually add each route for 

the network in the routing table on each router.  

171 

 
  The administrator should have good knowledge of the topology. If a new administrator 

comes, then he has to manually add each route so he should have very good knowledge 

of the routes of the topology.  

Dynamic routing: 

In  dynamic  routing,  routers  create  and  update  routing  tables  at  runtime  based  on  actual 

network conditions. They attempt to find the fastest path from the source to the destination by 

using a dynamic routing protocol, which is a set of rules that create, maintain, and update the 

dynamic routing table. 

The biggest advantage of dynamic routing is  that it adapts  to  changing network conditions, 

including traffic volume, bandwidth, and network failure. 

Dynamic routing makes  automatic adjustments of the routes according to the current state 

of  the  route  in  the  routing  table.  Dynamic  routing  uses  protocols  to  discover  network 

destinations and the routes to reach them. RIP and OSPF are the best examples of dynamic 

routing protocols. Automatic adjustments will be made to reach the network destination if 

one route goes down.  

A dynamic protocol has the following features:  

1.  The  routers  should  have  the  same  dynamic  protocol  running  in  order  to  exchange 

routes.  

2.  When  a  router  finds  a  change  in  the  topology  then  the  router  advertises  it to  all other 

routers.  

Advantages –  

  Easy to configure.  

  More effective at selecting the best route to a destination remote network and also for 

discovering remote network.  

Disadvantage –  

  Consumes more bandwidth for communicating with other neighbors.  

  Less secure than static routing.  

13.4 ROUTING TABLES 

A  Router  is  a  networking  device  that  forwards  data  packets  between  computer  networks. 

This  device  is  usually  connected  to  two  or  more  different  networks.  When  a  data  packet 

comes  to  a  router  port,  the  router  reads  address  information  in  packet  to  determine  out 

which  port  the  packet  will  be  sent.  For  example,  a  router  provides  you  with  the  internet 

access by connecting your LAN with the Internet. 

172 

 
When a packet arrives at a Router, it examines destination IP address of a received packet 

and  makes  routing  decisions  accordingly.  Routers  use Routing  Tables to  determine  out 

which interface the packet will be sent. A routing table lists all networks for which routes 

are known. Each router’s routing table is unique and stored in the RAM of the device. 

Routing Table:  

A routing table is a set of rules, often viewed in table format, which is used to determine 

where data packets traveling over an Internet Protocol (IP) network will be directed. All IP -

enabled devices, including routers and switches, use routing tables. See below a Routing 

Table: 

Destination      Subnet mask         Interface 

 128.75.43.0      255.255.255.0       Eth0 

 128.75.43.0      255.255.255.128     Eth1 

 192.12.17.5      255.255.255.255     Eth3 

 default                                             Eth2 

The  entry  corresponding  to  the default gateway  configuration  is  a  network  destination  of 

0.0.0.0  with  a  network  mask  (netmask)  of  0.0.0.0.  The  Subnet  Mask  of  default  route  is 

always 0.0.0.0 . 

Entries of an IP Routing Table: 

A routing table contains the information necessary to forward a packet along the best path 

toward its destination. Each packet contains information about its origin and destination. 

Routing Table provides the device with instructions for sending the packet to the next hop 

on its route across the network. 

Each entry in the routing table consists of the following entries: 

173 

 
 
1.  Network ID: 

The network ID or destination corresponding to the route. 

2.  Subnet Mask: 

The mask that is used to match a destination IP address to the network ID. 

3.  Next Hop: 

The IP address to which the packet is forwarded 

4.  Outgoing Interface: 

Outgoing interface the packet should go out to reach the destination network. 

5.  Metric: 

A  common  use  of  the  metric  is  to  indicate  the minimum  number  of  hops (routers 

crossed) to the network ID. 

Routing table entries can be used to store the following types of routes: 

  Directly Attached Network IDs 

  Remote Network IDs 

  Host Routes 

  Default Route 

  Destination 

When a router receives a packet, it examines the destination IP address, and looks 

up into its Routing Table to figure out which interface packet will be sent out. 

A host or a router has a routing table with an entry for each destination, or a combination of 

destinations, to route IP packets. The routing table can be either static or dynamic. 

Static Routing Table: 

A static  routing table  contains  information  entered manually. The administrator enters  the 

route  for  each  destination  into  the  table.  When  a  table  is  created,  it  cannot  update 

automatically when there is a change in the Internet. The table must be manually altered by 

the administrator. 

A static routing table can be used in a small internet that does not change very often, or in an 

experimental internet for troubleshooting. It is poor strategy to use a static routing table in a 

big internet such as the Internet 

Dynamic Routing Table: 

A  dynamic  routing  table  is  updated  periodically  by  using  one  of  the  dynamic  routing 

protocols such as RIP, OSPF, or BGP. Whenever there is a change in the Internet, such as a 

174 

 
shutdown of a router or breaking of a link, the dynamic routing protocols update all the tables 

in the routers (and eventually in the host) automatically. 

The routers in a big internet such as the Internet need to be updated dynamically for efficient 

delivery of the IP packets 

13.5 SUMMARY 

In this unit, we have studies about router, routing table and virtual circuit switching. Virtual 

circuit  switching  is a  packet  switching  methodology  whereby  a  path  is  established  between 

the source and the final destination through which all the packets will be routed during a call. 

This  path  is  called  a  virtual  circuit  because  to  the  user,  the  connection  appears  to  be  a 

dedicated physical circuit. 

A router is a device that connects two or more packet-switched networks or subnetworks. It 

serves  two  primary  functions:  managing  traffic  between  these  networks  by  forwarding data 

packets to their intended IP addresses, and allowing multiple devices to use the same Internet 

connection. 

There  are  several  types  of  routers,  but  most  routers  pass  data  between LANs  (local  area 

networks) and WANs  (wide  area  networks).  A  LAN  is  a  group  of  connected  devices 

restricted to a specific geographic area. A LAN usually requires a single router. 

A  WAN,  by  contrast,  is  a  large  network  spread  out  over  a  vast  geographic  area.  Large 

organizations  and  companies  that  operate  in  multiple  locations  across  the  country,  for 

instance, will need separate LANs for each location, which then connect to the other LANs to 

form a WAN. Because a WAN is distributed over a large area, it often necessitates multiple 

routers and switches. 

Think of a router as an air traffic controller and data packets  as aircraft headed to different 

airports (or networks). Just as each plane has a unique destination and follows a unique route, 

each packet needs to be guided to its destination as efficiently as  possible. In the same way 

that an air traffic controller ensures that planes reach their destinations without getting lost or 

suffering  a  major  disruption  along  the  way,  a  router  helps  direct  data  packets  to  their 

destination IP address. 

In order to direct packets effectively, a router uses an internal routing table — a list of paths 

to various network destinations. The router reads a packet's header to determine where it is 

going, then consults the routing table to figure out the most efficient path to that destination. 

It then forwards the packet to the next network in the path. 

175 

 
 
13.6 KEYWORDS 

Virtual circuit switching, router, routing table, static routing, dynamic routing 

13.7 QUESTIONS FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  Explain  Virutal  circuit  switching.  Write  the  pictorial  representation  of  virtual  circuit 

connection over a telephone call. 

2. Define router. Explain routing concepts. 

3. Explain static routing and dynamic routing. 

4. Write a note on routing table. 

13.8 REFERENCES 

1.  https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ 

2.  https://www.javatpoint.com/ 

3.  https://aws.amazon.com/ 

4.  https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ 

5.  https://faculty.ksu.edu.sa/sites/default/files/2-chapter2-routing-algorithms.pdf 

6.  https://ecomputernotes.com/ 

7.  Data communication and networking fourth edition by Behrouz A. Forouzan 

8.  Computer networks fifth edition by Tanenbaum ,Pearson Education India 

176 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-14 

ROUTING ALGORITHMS 

Structure: 

14.0 Objectives 

14.1 Introduction 

14.2 Adoptive and Non-adoptive routing algorithms 

14.3 Dijkstra’s shortest path routing algorithm 

14.4 congestion control algorithms 

        14.4.1 Leaky bucket algorithm 

        14.4.2 Token bucket algorithm 

14.5 Summary 

14.6 Keywords 

14.7 Questions for self study 

14.8 References 

14.0 OBJECTIVES 

After studying this unit, you will be able to 

  Explain Dijkstra’s routing algorithm 

  Describe shortest path routing algorithm 

  Explain Congestion control algorithm 

  Elucidate Leaky bucket algorithm 

14.1 INTRODUCTION 

 Routing algorithm 

In  order  to  transfer  the  packets  from  source  to  the  destination,  the  network  layer  must 

determine  the  best  route  through  which  packets  can  be  transmitted.  Whether  the  network 

layer provides datagram service or virtual circuit service, the main job of the network layer is 

to  provide  the  best  route.  The  routing  protocol  provides  this  job.  The  routing  protocol  is  a 

routing algorithm that provides the best path from the source to the destination. The best path 

is the path that has the "least-cost path" from source to the destination. Routing is the process 

of forwarding the packets from source to the destination but the best route to send the packets 

is determined by the routing algorithm. 

177 

 
 
 
14.2 ADOPTIVE AND NON-ADOPTIVE ROUTING ALGORITHMS 

The Routing algorithm is divided into two categories: 

o  Adaptive Routing algorithm 

o  Non-adaptive Routing algorithm 

Adaptive  routing  algorithms,  also  known  as  dynamic  routing  algorithms,  makes  routing 

decisions  dynamically  while  transferring  data  packets  from  the  source  to  the  destination. 

These algorithms construct routing tables depending on the network conditions like network 

traffic  and  topology.  They  try  to  compute  computes  the  best  path,  i.e.  “least  –  cost  path”, 

depending upon the hop count, transit time and distance. 

Types of Adaptive Routing Algorithms 

The three popular types of adaptive routing algorithms are shown in the following diagram − 

  Centralized  algorithm −  In  centralized  routing,  one  centralized  node  has  the  total 

network  information  and  takes  the  routing  decisions.  It  finds  the  least-cost  path 

between source and destination nodes by using global knowledge about the network. 

So, it is also known as global routing algorithm. The advantage of this routing is that 

only  the  central  node  is  required  to  store  network  information  and  so  the  resource 

requirement  of  the  other  nodes  may  be  less.  However,  routing  performance  is  too 

much dependent upon the central node. An example of centralized routing is link state 

routing algorithm. 

 

Isolated  algorithm −  In  this  algorithm,  the  nodes  make  the  routing  decisions  based 

upon local information available to them instead of gathering information from other 

nodes. They do not have information regarding the link status. While this helps in fast 

decision  making,  the  nodes  may  transmit  data  packets  along  congested  network 

resulting  in  delay.  The  examples  of  isolated  routing  are  hot  potato  routing  and 

backward learning. 

178 

 
 
 
  Distributed algorithm − This is a decentralized algorithm where each node receives 

information from its neighboring nodes and takes the decision based upon the received 

information.  The  least-cost  path  between  source  and  destination  is  computed 

iteratively  in  a  distributed  manner.  An  advantage  is  that  each  node  can  dynamically 

change routing decisions based upon the changes in the network. However, on the flip 

side, delays may be introduced due to time required to gather information. Example of 

distributed algorithm is distance vector routing algorithm. 

Non-adaptive routing algorithms, also known as static routing algorithms, do not change the 

selected  routing  decisions  for  transferring  data  packets  from  the  source  to  the  destination. 

They construct a static routing table in advance to determine the path through which packets 

are to be sent. 

The  static  routing  table  is  constructed  based  upon  the  routing  information  stored  in  the 

routers when the network is booted up. Once the static paths are available to all the routers, 

they transmit the data packets along these paths. The changing network topology and traffic 

conditions do not affect the routing decisions. 

Types of Non − adaptive Routing Algorithms 

  Flooding −  In  flooding,  when  a  data  packet  arrives  at  a  router,  it  is  sent  to  all  the 

outgoing links except the one it has arrived on. Flooding may be of three types− 

o  Uncontrolled  flooding −  Here,  each  router  unconditionally  transmits  the 

incoming data packets to all its neighbours. 

o  Controlled flooding − They use some methods to control the transmission of 

packets  to  the neighbouring nodes. The two popular algorithms  for controlled 

flooding are Sequence Number Controlled Flooding (SNCF) and Reverse Path 

Forwarding (RPF). 

o  Selective flooding − Here, the routers don't transmit the incoming packets only 

along  those  paths  which  are  heading  towards  approximately  in  the  right 

direction, instead of every available paths. 

  Random walks (RW) − This is a probabilistic algorithm where a data packet is sent 

by  a  router  to  any  one  of  its  neighbours  randomly.  The  transmission  path  thereby 

179 

 
 
formed is a random walk. RW can explore the alternative routes very efficiently. RW 

is  very  simple  to  implement,  requires  small  memory  footprints,  does  not  topology 

information of the network and has inherent load balancing property. RW is suitable 

for very small devices and for dynamic networks. 

14.3 DIJKSTRA’S SHORTEST PATH ROUTING ALGORITHM 

The goal of shortest path routing is to find a path between two nodes that has the lowest total 

cost, where the total cost of a path is the sum of arc costs in that path. 

For example, Dijikstra uses the nodes labelling with its distance from the source node along 

the better-known route. 

Shortest  path can  be  calculated  only  for  the  weighted  graphs.  The  edges  connecting  two 

vertices can be assigned a nonnegative real number, called the weight of the edge. A graph 

with such weighted edges is called a weighted graph. 

  Let G be a weighted graph. Let u and v be two vertices in G, and let P be a path in G from 

u to v. The weight of the path P is the sum of the weights of all the edges on the path P,   

Which is also called the weight of v from u via P.   

Let G be a weighted graph representing a highway structure. Suppose that the weight of an 

edge represents the travel time. For example, to plan monthly business trips, a salesperson 

wants to find the shortest path (that is, the path with the smallest weight) from her or his city 

to  every  other  city  in  the  graph.  Many  such  problems  exist  in  which  we  want  to  find  the 

shortest path from a given vertex, called the source, to every other vertex in the graph. This 

section describes the shortest path algorithm, also called the greedy algorithm, developed by 

Dijkstra. 

Dijkstra’s  Shortest Path Algorithm 

 Given  a  vertex,  say  vertex  (that  is,  a  source),  this  section  describes  the  shortest  path 

algorithm. 

The general algorithm is: 

1. Initialize the array smallestWeight so that smallestWeight[u] = weights[vertex, u]. 

2. Set smallestWeight[vertex] = 0. 

180 

 
 
 
 
3.  Find  the  vertex,  v,  that  is  closest  to  vertex  for  which  the  shortest  path  has  not  been 

determined. 

4. Mark v as the (next) vertex for which the smallest weight is found. 

5.  For  each  vertex  w  in  G,  such  that  the  shortest  path  from  vertex  to  w  has  not  been 

determined and an edge (v, w) exists, if the weight of the path to w via v is smaller than its 

current weight, update the weight of w to the weight of v + the weight of the edge (v, w). 

Because there are n vertices, repeat Steps 3 through 5, n – 1 times. 

Example : Shortest Path 

181 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
14.4 CONGESTION CONTROL ALGORITHMS 

What is congestion? 

A state occurring in network layer when the message traffic is so heavy that it slows down 

network response time. 

 Effects of Congestion 

  As delay increases, performance decreases. 

 

If delay increases, retransmission occurs, making situation worse. 

Congestion  causes  choking  of  the  communication  medium.  When  too  many  packets  are 

displayed in a method of the subnet, the subnet's performance degrades. Hence, a network's 

communication channel is called congested if packets are traversing the path and experience 

delays mainly over the path's propagation delay. 

Congestion control algorithms 

 

 Congestion  Control  is  a  mechanism  that  controls  the  entry  of  data  packets  into  the 

network,  enabling  a  better  use  of  a  shared  network  infrastructure  and  avoiding 

congestive collapse.  

  Congestive-Avoidance  Algorithms  (CAA)  are  implemented  at  the  TCP  layer  as  the 

mechanism to avoid congestive collapse in a network. 

  There are two congestion control algorithm which are as follows: 

Leaky bucket and token bucket algorithm 

14.4.1  Leaky Bucket Algorithm 

  The leaky bucket algorithm discovers its use in the context of network traffic shaping or 

rate-limiting.  

  A  leaky  bucket  execution  and  a  token  bucket  execution  are  predominantly  used  for 

traffic shaping algorithms. 

  This  algorithm  is  used  to  control  the  rate  at  which  traffic  is  sent  to  the  network  and 

shape the burst traffic to a steady traffic stream. 

  The disadvantages compared with the leaky-bucket algorithm are the inefficient use of 

available network resources. 

  The  large  area  of  network  resources  such  as  bandwidth  is  not  being  used  effectively. 

182 

 
  
 
 
Let us consider an example to understand this algorithm.  

Imagine  a  bucket  with  a  small hole  in  the  bottom.No matter  at  what  rate  water  enters  the 

bucket, the outflow is at constant rate.When the bucket is full with water additional water 

entering spills over the sides and is lost. 

Similarly,  each  network  interface  contains  a  leaky  bucket  and  the  following steps are 

involved in leaky bucket algorithm: 

1.   When host wants to send packet, packet is thrown into the bucket. 

2.   The bucket leaks at a constant rate, meaning the network interface transmits packets at 

a constant rate. 

3.   Bursty traffic is converted to a uniform traffic by the leaky bucket. 

4.  In practice the bucket is a finite queue that outputs at a finite rate. 

14.4.2  Token bucket Algorithm 

  The leaky bucket algorithm has a rigid output design at an average rate independent of 

the bursty traffic. 

 

In some applications, when large bursts arrive, the output is allowed to speed up. This 

calls  for  a  more  flexible  algorithm,  preferably  one  that  never  loses  information. 

Therefore,  a  token  bucket  algorithm  finds  its  uses  in  network  traffic  shaping  or  rate-

limiting. 

 

It  is  a  control  algorithm  that  indicates  when  traffic  should  be  sent.  This  order  comes 

based on the display of tokens in the bucket.  

  The bucket contains tokens. Each of the tokens defines a packet of predetermined size. 

Tokens in the bucket are deleted for the ability to share a packet. 

183 

 
 
  When tokens are shown, a flow to transmit traffic appears in the display of tokens. 

 

 No token means no flow sends its packets. Hence, a flow transfers traffic up to its peak 

burst rate in good tokens in the bucket. 

 Need of token bucket Algorithm:- 

 The  leaky  bucket  algorithm  enforces  output  pattern  at  the  average  rate,  no  matter  how 

bursty the traffic is. So in order to deal with the bursty traffic we need a flexible algorithm 

so that the data is not lost. One such algorithm is token bucket algorithm. 

 Steps of this algorithm is as follows: 

 In regular intervals tokens are thrown into the bucket.  

1.  The bucket has a maximum capacity.  

2.  If there is a ready packet, a token is removed from the bucket, and the packet is sent. 

3.  If there is no token in the bucket, the packet cannot be sent. 

 Let’s understand with an example, 

 In  figure  (A)  we  see  a  bucket  holding  three  tokens,  with  five  packets  waiting  to  be 

transmitted. For a packet to be transmitted, it must capture and destroy one token. In figure 

(B) We see that three of the five packets have gotten through, but the other  two are stuck 

waiting for more tokens to be generated. 

 Ways  in  which  token  bucket  is  superior  to  leaky  bucket: The  leaky  bucket  algorithm 

controls  the  rate  at  which  the  packets  are  introduced  in  the  network,  but  it  is  very 

conservative in nature. Some flexibility is introduced in the token bucket algorithm. In the 

token  bucket,  algorithm  tokens  are  generated  at  each  tick  (up  to  a  certain  limit).  For  an 

incoming packet to be transmitted, it must capture a token and the transmission takes place 

at the same rate. Hence some of the busty packets are transmitted at the same rate if tokens 

are available and thus introduces some amount of flexibility in the system. 

 Formula: M * s = C + ρ * s where S – is time taken M – Maximum output rate ρ – Token 

arrival rate C – Capacity of the token bucket in byte 

Let’s understand with an example, 

184 

 
  
14.5 SUMMARY 

A routing algorithm is a procedure that lays down the route or path to transfer data packets 

from source to the destination. They help in directing Internet traffic efficiently. After a data 

packet  leaves  its  source,  it  can  choose  among  the  many  different  paths  to  reach  its 

destination. 

Routing v/s Flooding: 
Routing 
Rouitng Table is 
required 
May give 
shortest path 
Less reliable 
Traffic is less 
No duplicate 
packets 

Flooding 
No routing table is 
required 
Always gives shortest 
path 
More reliable 
Traffic is high 
Duplicate packets are 
present 

185 

 
 
 
  
  
14.6 KEYWORDS 

Leaky  bucket  algorithm,  token  bucket  algorithm,  Dijkstra’s  Shortest  Path  Algorithm, 

adoptive  routing  algorithms,  Non-adoptive  routing  algorithms,flodding,  random  walk, 

isolated, distributed, centralized 

14.7 QUESTIONS FOR SELF STUDY 

1. Explain adoptive routing algorithms. 

2. Explain Non-adoptive routing algorithms. 

3. Describe Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm with example. 

4. In detail, explain leaky bucket algorithm. 

5. Explain token bucket algorithm. 

6. Give reasons, why token bucket algorithm is superior over leaky bucket algorithm. 

14.8 REFERENCES 

1.  https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ 

2.  https://www.javatpoint.com/ 

3.  https://aws.amazon.com/ 

4.  https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ 

5.  https://faculty.ksu.edu.sa/sites/default/files/2-chapter2-routing-algorithms.pdf 

6.  https://ecomputernotes.com/ 

186 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATA LINK ISSUES and ERROR DETECTING METHODS 

UNIT-15 

Structure: 

15.0 Objectives 

15.1 Introduction 

15.2 Data link layer design issues 

15.3 Error detection methods 

        15.3.1 Simple parity check 

        15.3.2 Two-dimensional Parity check 

        15.3.2 Check sum 

        15.3.3 Cyclic Redundancy Check 

15.4 Summary 

15.5 Keywords 

15.6 Questions for self study 

15.7 References 

15.0 OBJECTIVES 

After studying this unit, you will be able to 

  Understand the data link layer design issues 

  Explain error detecting methods 

  Distinguish between single parity error and burst error 

  Explain check sum and cyclic redundancy check 

15.1 INTRODUCTION 
The  data  link  layer  in  the  OSI  (Open  System  Interconnections)  Model  is  in  between  the 

physical  layer  and  the  network  layer.  This  layer  converts  the  raw  transmission  facility 

provided by the physical layer to a reliable and error-free link. 

The main functions and the design issues of this layer are 

  Providing services to the network layer 

  Framing 

  Error Control 

  Flow Control 

The primary function of this layer is  to  provide  a well-defined service interface to  network 

layer above it. 

187 

 
Error  is  a  condition  when  the  receiver’s  information  does  not  match  with  the  sender’s 

information. During transmission, digital signals suffer from noise that can introduce errors 

in the binary bits travelling from sender to receiver. That means a 0 bit may change to 1 or 

a  1  bit  may  change  to  0.To  avoid  this,  we  use  error-detecting  codes  which  are  additional 

data  added  to  a  given  digital  message  to  help  us  detect  if  any  error  has  occurred  during 

transmission of the message. 

Basic approach used for error detection is the use of redundancy bits, where additional bits 

are added to facilitate detection of errors. 

Some popular techniques for error detection are: 

1. Simple Parity check 

2. Two-dimensional Parity check 

3. Checksum 

4. Cyclic redundancy check 

15.2 DATA LINK LAYER DESIGN ISSUES 
Data-link  layer is  the  second  layer  after  the  physical  layer.  The  data  link  layer  is 

responsible for maintaining the data link between two hosts or nodes.  

Before  going  through  the  design  issues  in  the  data  link  layer.  Some  of  its  sub-layers  and 

their functions are as following below.  

The data link layer is divided into two sub-layers :  

1.  Logical Link Control Sub-layer (LLC) –  

Provides the logic for the data  link, Thus it controls the synchronization, flow control, 

and error checking functions of the data link layer. Functions are –  

(i) Error Recovery.  

(ii) It performs the flow control operations.  

(iii) User addressing.  

2.  Media Access Control Sub-layer (MAC) –  

It  is  the  second  sub-layer  of  data-link  layer.  It  controls  the  flow  and  multiplexing  for 

transmission  medium.  Transmission  of  data  packets  is  controlled  by  this  layer.  This 

layer 

is  responsible  for  sending 

the  data  over 

the  network 

interface  card.  

Functions are –  

 

 

 

(i) To perform the control of access to media.  

(ii) It performs the unique addressing to stations directly connected to LAN.  

(iii) Detection of errors.  

188 

 
Design issues with data link layer are:   

1.  Services provided to the network layer –  

The data link layer act as a service interface to the network layer. The principle service 

is  transferring  data  from  network  layer  on  sending  machine  to  the  network  layer  on 

destination machine. This transfer also takes place via DLL (Data link-layer).  

In the OSI Model, each layer uses the services of the layer below it and provides services to 

the  layer  above  it.  The  data  link  layer  uses  the  services  offered  by  the  physical  layer.  The 

primary function of this layer is to provide a well-defined service interface to network layer 

above it. 

The types of services provided can be of three types − 

  Unacknowledged connectionless service 

  Acknowledged connectionless service 

  Acknowledged connection - oriented service 

2.  Frame synchronization –  

The  source  machine  sends  data  in  the  form  of  blocks  called  frames  to  the  destination 

machine. The starting and ending of each frame should be identified so that the frame 

can be recognized by the destination machine.   

The data link layer encapsulates each data packet from the network layer into frames that 

are then transmitted. 

A frame has three parts, namely − 

189 

 
 
 
  Frame Header 

  Payload field that contains the data packet from network layer 

  Trailer 

3.  Flow control –  

Flow control is done to prevent the flow of data frame at the receiver end.  The source 

machine  must  not  send  data  frames  at  a  rate  faster  than  the  capacity  of  destination 

machine to accept them.  

The  data  link  layer  regulates  flow  control  so  that  a  fast  sender  does  not  drown  a  slow 

receiver. When the sender sends frames at very high speeds, a slow receiver may not be 

able to handle it. There will be frame losses even if the transmission is error-free. The two 

common approaches for flow control are − 

  Feedback based flow control 

  Rate based flow control 

There  are  many  reasons  such  as  noise,  cross-talk  etc.,  which  may  help  data  to  get 

corrupted  during  transmission.  The  upper  layers  work  on  some  generalized  view  of 

network  architecture  and  are  not  aware  of  actual  hardware  data  processing.  Hence,  the 

upper layers expect error-free transmission between the systems. Most of the applications 

would not function expectedly if they receive erroneous data. Applications such as voice 

and video may not be that affected and with some errors they may still function well. 

4.  Error control –  

Error  control  is  done  to  prevent  duplication  of  frames.  The  errors  introduced  during 

transmission  from  source  to  destination  machines  must  be  detected  and  corrected  at  the 

destination machine.  

190 

 
 
The data link layer ensures error free link for data transmission. The issues it caters to with 

respect to error control are − 

  Dealing with transmission errors 

  Sending acknowledgement frames in reliable connections 

  Retransmitting lost frames 

 

Identifying duplicate frames and deleting them 

  Controlling access to shared channels in case of broadcasting 

Data-link  layer  uses  some  error  control  mechanism  to  ensure  that  frames (data  bit  streams) 

are transmitted with certain level of accuracy. But to understand how errors is controlled, it is 

essential to know what types of errors may occur. 

Types of Errors 

There may be three types of errors: 

  Single bit error 

In a frame, there is only one bit, anywhere though, which is corrupt. 

  Multiple bits error 

Frame is received with more than one bit in corrupted state. 

  Burst error 

Frame contains more than1 consecutive bits corrupted. 

Error control mechanism may involve two possible ways: 

  Error detection 

  Error correction 

191 

 
 
 
 
 
 
15.3 ERROR DETECTION METHODS 
Error Detection 

Errors in the received frames are detected by means of Parity Check and Cyclic Redundancy 

Check (CRC). In both cases, few extra bits are sent along with actual data to confirm that bits 

received at other end are same as they were sent. If the counter-check at receiver’ end fails, 

the bits are considered corrupted. 

Whenever  a  message  is  transmitted,  it  may  get  scrambled  by  noise  or  data  may  get 

corrupted. To avoid this, we use error-detecting codes which are additional data added to a 

given digital message to help us detect if any error has occurred during transmission of the 

message. 

 Basic approach used for error detection is the use of redundancy bits, where additional bits 

are added to facilitate detection of errors. 

Some popular techniques for error detection are: 

1. Simple Parity check 

2. Two-dimensional Parity check 

3. Checksum 

4. Cyclic redundancy check 

These methods are implemented either at Data link layer or Transport Layer of OSI Model. 

Error Detecting Methods 

 15.3.1. Simple Parity check 

Blocks of data from the source are subjected to a check bit or parity bit generator form, 

where a parity of : 

  1 is added to the block if it contains odd number of 1’s, and 

  0 is added if it contains even number of 1’s 

This scheme makes the total number of 1’s even, that is why it is called even parity 

Checking. 

192 

 
 
15.3.2  Two-dimensional Parity check 

Parity check bits are calculated for each row, which is equivalent to a simple parity 

check  bit.  Parity  check  bits  are  also  calculated  for  all  columns,  then  both  are  sent 

along  with  the  data.  At  the  receiving  end  these  are  compared  with  the  parity  bits 

calculated on the received data. 

15.3.3. Checksum 

 

 

In checksum error detection scheme, the data is divided into k segments each of m bits. 

In the sender’s end the segments are added using 1’s complement arithmetic to get the 

sum. The sum is complemented to get the checksum. 

  The checksum segment is sent along with the data segments. 

  At the receiver’s end, all received segments are added using 1’s complement arithmetic 

to get the sum. The sum is complemented. 

 

If the result is zero, the received data is accepted; otherwise discarded. 

193 

 
 
15.3.4. Cyclic redundancy check (CRC) 

  Unlike checksum scheme, which is based on addition, CRC is based on binary division. 

 

In CRC, a sequence of redundant bits, called cyclic redundancy check bits, are 

appended to the end of data unit so that the resulting data unit becomes exactly divisible 

by a second, predetermined binary number. 

  At the destination, the incoming data unit is divided by the same number. If at this step 

there is no remainder, the data unit is assumed to be correct and is therefore accepted. 

  A remainder indicates that the data unit has been damaged in transit and therefore must 

be rejected. 

194 

 
 
 
 
  
Example : 

15.4 SUMMARY 

Error 

A condition when the receiver’s information does not match with the  sender’s information. 

During transmission, digital signals suffer from noise that can introduce errors in the binary 

bits travelling from sender to receiver. That means a 0 bit may change to 1 or a 1 bit may 

change to 0. 

Parity Check 

One extra bit is sent along with the original bits to make number of 1s either even in case of 
even parity, or odd in case of odd parity. 

The sender while creating a frame counts the number of 1s in it. For example, if even parity is 

used  and  number  of  1s  is  even  then  one  bit  with  value  0  is  added.  This  way  number  of  1s 

remains even. If the number of 1s is odd, to make it even a bit with value 1 is added. 

The receiver simply counts the number of 1s in a frame. If the count of 1s is even and even 

parity is used, the frame is considered to be not-corrupted and is accepted. If the count of 1s 

is odd and odd parity is used, the frame is still not corrupted. 

195 

 
 
 
If  a  single  bit  flips  in  transit,  the  receiver  can  detect  it  by  counting  the  number  of  1s.  But 

when more than one bit is erroneous, then it is very hard for the receiver to detect the error. 

Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) 

CRC is a different approach to detect if the received frame contains valid data. This technique 

involves  binary  division  of  the  data  bits  being  sent.  The  divisor  is  generated  using 

polynomials. The sender performs a division operation on the bits being sent and calculates 

the remainder. Before sending the actual bits, the sender adds the remainder at the end of the 

actual bits.  Actual  data  bits plus  the remainder  is called  a  code word. The sender transmits 

data bits as codewords. 

At the other end, the receiver performs division operation on codewords using the same CRC 

divisor.  If  the  remainder  contains  all  zeros  the  data  bits  are  accepted,  otherwise  it  is 

considered as there some data corruption occurred in transit. 

15.5 KEYWORDS 

Error detecting methods, error correction methods, CRC, single parity error, frame control, 

error control, flow control, check sum, simple parity check, multi-dimensional parity check 

15.6 QUESTIONS FOR SELF STUDY 

1.  Explain design issues with data link layer. 

2.  List and explain the sublayers of data link layer. 

3.  Explain error detecting methods with example. 

4.  Describe flow control and error control. 

 15.7 REFERENCES 

1.  https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ 

196 

 
 
2.  https://www.javatpoint.com/ 

3.  https://aws.amazon.com/ 

4.  https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ 

5.  https://faculty.ksu.edu.sa/sites/default/files/2-chapter2-routing-algorithms.pdf 

6.  https://ecomputernotes.com/ 

197 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-16 

ERROR CORRECTION METHODS 

Structure: 

16.0 Objectives 

16.1 Introduction 

16.2 error correction methods 

     16.2.1 Hamming Code 

     16.2.2 Single bit error correction code 

16.3 Summary 

16.4 Keywords 

16.5 Questions for self study 

16.6 References 

16.0 OBJECTIVES 
After studying this unit, you will be able to  

  Explain error correction methods 

  Describe hamming code method 

  Explain single bit error correction method 

16.1 INTRODUCTION 
Error Correction 

In Error Detection, the receiver only needs to know that the received code word is invalid; 

But in Error Correction the receiver needs to guess the Original code word that is sent. In this 

way, error Correction is much more difficult than Error Detection. The need for redundant 

bits is more during error correction rather than for error detection. 

Structure of encoder and decoder in the error correction 

In order to detect or correct the errors, there is a need to send some extra bits along with the 

data. These extra bits are commonly known as Redundant bits. 

198 

 
 
As we had learned in the previous tutorial that original data is divided into segments of k bits; 

it is referred to as dataword. When we add r redundant bits to each block in order to make 

the length;n=k+r then it is referred to as Codeword. 

There are two ways to handle the error correction: 

1.  Whenever an error discovered, the receiver can have the sender in order to retransmit 

the  entire  data  unit.  This  technique  is  known  as  the Backward  Error  correction 

technique. This technique is simple and inexpensive in the case of wired transmission 

like fiber optics; there is no expense in retransmitting the data. In the case of wireless 

transmission, retransmission costs too much thus forward error correction technique is 

used then. 

2.  The  receiver  can  use  an  error-correcting  code  that  automatically  contains  certain 

errors. This technique is known as the Forward Error Correction technique. 

In order to correct the errors, one has to know the exact position of the error. For example, In 

case  if  we  want  to  calculate  a  single-bit  error,  the  error  correction  code  then  mainly 

determines which one of seven bits is in the error. 

In order to achieve this, we have to add some additional redundant bits. 

Suppose  r  (as  the  redundant  bits)  and  d  indicates  the  total  number  of  data  bits.  In  order  to 

calculate the redundant bits(r), the given formula is used; 

2r= d+r+1 

Error correction is mainly done with the help of the Hamming code. 

16.2 ERROR CORRECTION METHODS 
Detection versus Correction 

The correction of errors is more difficult than the detection. In error detection, we are looking 

only  to  see  if  any  error  has  occurred.  The  answer  is  a  simple  yes  or  no.  We  are  not  even 

interested in the number of errors. A single-bit error is the same for us as a burst error. 

In  error  correction,  we  need  to  know  the  exact  number  of  bits  that  are  corrupted  and  more 

importantly,  their  location  in  the  message.  The  number  of  the  errors  and  the  size  of  the 

message are important factors. If we need to correct one single error in an 8-bit data unit, we 

need to consider eight possible error locations; if we need to correct two errors in a data unit 

of  the  same  size,  we  need  to  consider  28  possibilities.  You  can  imagine  the  receiver's 

difficulty in finding 10 errors in a data unit of 1000 bits.  

In the digital world, error correction can be done in two ways: 

  Backward Error Correction When the receiver detects an error in the data received; 

it requests back the sender to retransmit the data unit. 

199 

 
  Forward  Error  Correction When  the  receiver  detects  some  error  in  the  data 

received,  it  executes  error-correcting  code,  which  helps  it  to  auto-recover  and  to 

correct some kinds of errors. 

The first one, Backward Error Correction, is simple and can only be efficiently used where 

retransmitting  is  not  expensive.  For  example,  fiber  optics.  But  in  case  of  wireless 

transmission retransmitting may cost too much. In the latter case, Forward Error Correction is 

used. 

To correct the error in data frame, the receiver must know exactly which bit in the frame is 

corrupted. To locate the bit in error, redundant bits are used as parity bits for error detection. 

For example, we take ASCII words (7 bits data), then there could be 8 kind of information we 

need: first seven bits to tell us which bit is error and one more bit to tell that there is no error. 

16.2.1 Hamming Code 

It is a technique developed by R.W. hamming. This can be applied to data units of any length. 

This code mainly uses the relationship between data and redundancy bits. 

The hamming code technique, which is an error-detection and error-correction technique, 

was  proposed  by R.W.  Hamming.  Whenever  a  data  packet  is  transmitted  over  a  network, 

there are possibilities that the data bits may get lost or damaged during transmission. 

Let's understand the Hamming code concept with an example: 

Let's say you have received a 7-bit Hamming code which is 1011011. 

First, let us talk about the redundant bits. 

The redundant bits are some extra binary bits that are not part of the original data, but they 

are  generated  &  added  to  the  original  data  bit.  All  this  is  done  to  ensure  that  the  data  bits 

don't get damaged and if they do, we can recover them. 

Now the question arises, how do we determine the number of redundant bits to be added? 

We use the formula, 2r >= m+r+1; where r = redundant bit & m = data bit. 

From  the  formula  we  can  make  out  that  there  are 4  data  bits and 3  redundancy  bits, 

referring to the received 7-bit hamming code. 

Parity Bit: 

It is a bit appended to the data bits which ensures that the total number of 1's are even (even 

parity) or odd (odd parity). 

While  checking  the  parity,  if  the  total  number  of  1's  are  odd  then  write  the  value  of  parity 

bit P1(or P2 etc.)  as 1 (which  means  the  error  is  there  )  and  if  it  is  even  then  the  value  of 

parity bit is 0 (which means no error). 

200 

 
Hamming Code in Error Detection 

As we go through the example, the first step is to identify the bit position of the data & all the 

bit  positions  which  are  powers  of  2  are  marked  as  parity  bits  (e.g.  1,  2,  4,  8,  etc.).  The 

following image will help in visualizing the received hamming code of 7 bits. 

First, we need to detect whether there are any errors in this received hamming code. 

Step  1: For  checking  parity  bit P1,  use check  one  and  skip  one method,  which  means, 

starting from P1 and then skip P2, take D3 then skip P4 then take D5, and then skip D6 and 

take D7, this way we will have the following bits, 

As we can observe the total number of bits is odd so we will write the value of parity bit 

as P1 = 1. This means the error is there. 

Step 2: Check for P2 but while checking for P2, we will use the check two and skip 

two methods, which will give us the following data bits. But remember since we are checking 

for P2, so we have to start our count from P2 (P1 should not be considered). 

As we can observe that the number of 1's are even, then we will write the value of P2 = 0. 

This means there is no error. 

Step 3: Check for P4 but while checking for P4, we will use the check four and skip 

four methods, which will give us the following data bits. But remember since we are 

checking for P4, so we have started our count from P4(P1 & P2 should not be considered). 

As we can observe that the number of 1's is odd, then we will write the value of P4 = 1. This 

means the error is there. 

201 

 
 
 
 
 
So, from the above parity analysis, P1 & P4 are not equal to 0, so we can clearly say that the 

received hamming code has errors. 

Hamming Code: Error Correction 

Since we found that the received code has an error, so now we must correct them. To correct 

the errors, use the following steps: 

Now the error word E will be: 

Now we have to determine the decimal value of this error word 101 which is 5 (22 *1 + 21 * 

0 + 20 *1 = 5). 

We get E = 5, which states that the error is in the fifth data bit. To correct it, just invert the 

fifth data bit. 

So the correct data will be: 

General  Algorithm  of  Hamming  code: Hamming  Code  is  simply  the  use  of  extra  parity 

bits to allow the identification of an error. 

1.  Write the bit positions starting from 1 in binary form (1, 10, 11, 100, etc). 

2.  All the bit positions that are a power of 2 are marked as parity bits (1, 2, 4, 8, etc). 

3.  All the other bit positions are marked as data bits. 

4.  Each data bit is included in a unique set of parity bits, as  determined its bit position in 

binary  form. a. Parity  bit  1  covers  all  the  bits  positions  whose  binary  representation 

includes a 1 in the least significant position (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, etc). b. Parity bit 2 covers 

all  the  bits  positions  whose  binary  representation  includes  a  1  in  the  second  position 

from  the  least  significant  bit  (2,  3,  6,  7,  10,  11,  etc). c. Parity  bit  4  covers  all  the  bits 

positions  whose  binary  representation  includes  a  1  in  the  third  position  from  the  least 

significant  bit  (4–7,  12–15,  20–23,  etc). d. Parity  bit  8  covers  all  the  bits  positions 

whose binary representation includes a 1 in the fourth position from the least significant 

202 

 
 
 
 
bit bits (8–15, 24–31, 40–47, etc). e. In general, each parity bit covers all bits where the 

bitwise AND of the parity position and the bit position is non-zero. 

5.  Since  we  check  for  even  parity  set  a  parity  bit  to  1  if  the  total  number  of  ones  in  the 

positions it checks is odd. 

6.  Set a parity bit to 0 if the total number of ones in the positions it checks is even. 

Determining  the  position  of  redundant  bits  – These  redundancy  bits  are  placed  at 

positions that correspond to the power of 2.  

As in the above example: 

  The number of data bits = 7 

  The number of redundant bits = 4 

  The total number of bits = 11 

  The redundant bits are placed at positions corresponding to power of 2- 1, 2, 4, and 8 

  Suppose the data to be transmitted is 1011001, the bits will be placed as follows:  

203 

 
  
 
Determining the Parity bits: 

  R1  bit  is  calculated  using  parity  check  at  all  the  bits  positions  whose  binary 

representation includes a 1 in the least significant position. R1: bits 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11  

 

 To find the redundant bit R1, we check for even parity. Since the total number of 1’s in 

all the bit positions corresponding to R1 is an even number the value of R1 (parity bit’s 

value) = 0 

  R2  bit  is  calculated  using  parity  check  at  all  the  bits  positions  whose  binary 

representation includes a 1 in the second position from the least significant bit. R2: bits 

2,3,6,7,10,11  

 

 To find the redundant bit R2, we check for even parity. Since the total number of 1’s in 

all the bit positions corresponding to R2 is odd the value of R2(parity bit’s value)=1 

  R4  bit  is  calculated  using  parity  check  at  all  the  bits  positions  whose  binary 

representation includes a 1 in the third position from the least significant bit. R4: bits 4, 

5, 6, 7  

204 

 
 
 
 
 
  To find the redundant bit R4, we check for even parity. Since the total number of 1’s in all 

the bit positions corresponding to R4 is odd the value of R4(parity bit’s value) = 1 

1.  R8  bit  is  calculated  using  parity  check  at  all  the  bits  positions  whose  binary 

representation includes a 1 in the fourth position from the least significant bit. R8:  bit 

8,9,10,11 

  To find the redundant bit R8, we check for even parity. Since the total number of 1’s in 

all the bit positions corresponding to R8 is an even number the value of  R8(parity bit’s 

value)=0. Thus, the data transferred is: 

Error  detection  and  correction: Suppose  in  the  above  example  the  6th  bit  is  changed 

from 0 to 1 during data transmission, then it gives new parity values in the binary number:  

205 

 
  
 
 
The  bits  give  the  binary  number  0110  whose  decimal  representation  is  6.  Thus,  bit  6 

contains an error. To correct the error the 6th bit is changed from 1 to 0. 

16.2.2   Single bit error correction code: 

To calculate the numbers of redundant bits (r) required to correct d data bits, let us find out 

the relationship between the two. So we have (d+r) as the total number of bits, which are to 

be transmitted; then r must be able to indicate at least d+r+1 different values. Of these, one 

value means no error, and remaining d+r values indicate error location of error in each of d+r 

locations. So, d+r+1 states must be distinguishable by r bits, and r bits can indicates 2r states. 

Hence, 2r must be greater than d+r+1. 

2r >= d + r + 1 

The value of r must be determined by putting in the value of d in the relation. For example, if 

d is 7, then the smallest value of r that satisfies the above relation is 4. So the total bits, which 

are to be transmitted is 11 bits ( d + r = 7 + 4 = 11). 

Now  let  us  examine  how  we  can  manipulate  these  bits  to  discover  which  bit  is  in  error.  A 

technique developed by R.W.Hamming provides a practical solution. The solution or coding 

scheme he developed is commonly known as Hamming Code. Hamming code can be applied 

to data units of any length and uses the relationship between the data bits and redundant bits 

as discussed. 

Positions of redundancy bits in hamming code 

Basic approach for error detection by using Hamming code is as follows: 

»  To  each  group  of  m  information  bits  k  parity  bits  are  added  to  form  (m+k)  bit  code 

»  Location  of 

each  of 

the 

(m+k)  digits 

is 

assigned 

a  decimal  value. 

»  The  k  parity  bits  are  placed  in  positions  1,  2,  …,  2k-1  positions.–K  parity  checks  are 

performed on selected digits of each codeword. 

» At the receiving end the parity bits are recalculated. The decimal value of the k parity bits 

provides the bit-position in error, if any. 

206 

 
 
Use of hamming code for error correction for a 4-bit data 

Hamming  code  is  used  for  correction  for  4-bit  numbers  (d4d3d2d1)  with  the  help  of  three 

redundant  bits  (r3r2r1).  For  the  example  data  1010,  first  r1 (0)  is  calculated  considering  the 

parity of the bit positions, 1, 3, 5 and 7. Then the parity bits r2 is calculated considering bit 

positions 2, 3, 6 and 7. Finally, the parity bits r4 is calculated considering bit positions 4, 5, 6 

and  7  as  shown.  If  any  corruption  occurs  in  any  of  the  transmitted  code  1010010,  the  bit 

position in error can be found out by calculating r3r2r1 at the receiving end. For example, if 

the  received  code  word  is  1110010,  the  recalculated  value  of  r3r2r1 is  110,  which  indicates 

that bit position in error is 6, the decimal value of 110. 

Example: 

Let us consider an example for 5-bit data. Here 4 parity bits are required. Assume that during 

transmission bit 5 has been changed from 1 to 0 . The receiver receives the code word and 

recalculates  the  four  new  parity  bits  using  the  same  set  of  bits  used  by  the  sender  plus  the 

relevant  parity  (r)  bit  for  each  set  .  Then  it  assembles  the  new  parity  values  into  a  binary 

number in order of r positions (r8, r4, r2, r1). 

207 

 
 
Calculations: 

Parity recalculated (r8, r4, r2, r1) = 01012 = 510. 

Hence, bit 5th is in error i.e. d5 is in error. 

So, correct code-word which was transmitted is : 

16.3 SUMMARY 
Data can be corrupted during transmission. Some applications require that errors be detected 

and corrected.  In a single-bit error, only one bit in  the data unit has  changed. A burst error 
means  that two or more  bits in  the data unit have changed.  To detect or correct  errors, we 
need  to  send  extra  (redundant)  bits  with  data.    There  are  two  main  methods  of  error 
correction: forward error correction and correction by retransmission. 

The correction of errors is more difficult than the detection. In error detection, we are looking 

only  to  see  if  any  error  has  occurred.  The  answer  is  a  simple  yes  or  no.  We  are  not  even 

interested in the number of errors. A single-bit error is the same for us as a burst error. 

In  error  correction,  we  need  to  know  the  exact  number  of  bits  that  are  corrupted  and  more 

importantly,  their  location  in  the  message.  The  number  of  the  errors  and  the  size  of  the 

message are important factors. 

The  Hamming  distance  between  two  words  is  the  number  of  differences  between 

corresponding  bits.  The  minimum  Hamming  distance  is  the  smallest  Hamming  distance 

between all possible pairs in a set of words. 

Hamming  code is  a  set  of  error-correction  codes  that  can  be  used  to detect  and  correct 

the errors that can occur when the data is moved or stored from the sender to the receiver. 

It is a technique developed by R.W. Hamming for error correction. Redundant bits –

 Redundant  bits  are  extra  binary  bits  that  are  generated  and  added  to  the  information-

carrying bits of data transfer to ensure that no bits were lost during the data transfer. The 

number of redundant bits can be calculated using the following formula: 

208 

 
 
 
 2r ≥ m + r + 1  

 Where, r = redundant bit, m = data bit 

Suppose the number of data bits is 7, then the number of redundant bits can be calculated 

using: = 2^4 ≥ 7 + 4 + 1 Thus, the number of redundant bits= 4 Parity bits.  A parity bit is 

a bit appended to a data of binary bits to ensure that the total number of 1’s in the data is 

even or odd. Parity bits are used for error detection. There are two types of parity bits: 

1.  Even parity bit: In the case of even parity, for a given set of bits, the number of 1’s are 

counted. If that count is odd, the parity bit value is set to 1, making the total count of 

occurrences of 1’s an even number. If the total number of 1’s in a given set of bits is 

already even, the parity bit’s value is 0. 

2.  Odd Parity bit – In the case of odd parity, for a given set of bits, the number of 1’s are 

counted. If that count is even, the parity bit value is set to 1, making the total count of 

occurrences  of  1’s  an  odd  number.  If  the  total  number  of  1’s  in  a  given  set  of  bits  is 

already odd, the parity bit’s value is 0. 

16.4 KEYWORDS 
Error  detection,  error  correction,  even  parity,  odd  parity,  redundancy,  hamming  code, 

hamming distance, single bit error correction 

16.5 QUESTIONS FOR SELF STUDY 
1. Distinguish between error detection and error correction. 

2. Explain odd parity and even parity with example. 

3. Write the algorithm for hamming code. 

4. Explain Hamming code for error detection. 

5. Describe Hamming code for error correction. 

6. How do you determine the position of redundant bits? Explain. 

7. How do you determine the parity bits? Explain. 

8. Explain single bit error correction with example. 

16.6 REFERENCES 

1.  https://www.studytonight.com/computer-networks 

2.  https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ 

3.  https://www.javatpoint.com/ 

4.  https://aws.amazon.com/ 

5.  https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ 

6.  https://faculty.ksu.edu.sa/sites/default/files/2-chapter2-routing-algorithms.pdf 

7.  https://ecomputernotes.com 

209 

 
